
     But here is an artist.  He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
.. <p 2 >
.. <p 3 >
Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook.  I abandon the glory and distinction of
How then is this?  Are the green fields gone?  What do they here?  But look!
Niagara but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see
No.  They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling
Prairies in June,
Saco.  What is the chief element he employs?  There stand his trees, each with
Surely all this is not without meaning.  And still deeper the meaning of that
Whitehall northward.  What do you see?--Posted like silent sentinels all
Yet here they all unite.  Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of
a dive.  Strange!  Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the
a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; and here sleeps
afternoon.  Go from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by
all that region.  Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert,
are in the country; in some high land of lakes.  Take almost any path you
around the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean
by a pool in the stream.  There is magic in it.  Let the most absent-minded
crazy to go to sea?  Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you
crowds of water-gazers there.  Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath
eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not mean to have it
feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in
from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues, --north, east, south, and west.
he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was drowned.  But that same
here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly bound for
his meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a
holy?  Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove?
image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans.  It is the image of the
in it.  Besides, passengers get sea-sick --grow quarrelsome --don't sleep of
in lath and plaster--tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks.
in.  And there they stand--miles of them--leagues.  Inlanders all, they come
inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger.  For to go as a passenger you
invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach?  Why is almost every
is the one charm wanting? --Water --there is not a drop of water there!  Were
it?  Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls
land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice.
like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain, unless the
must needs have a purse, and a purse is but a rag unless you have something
nights --do not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing; --no, I never go as a
of men be plunged in his deepest reveries--stand that man on his legs, set his
of ships from China; some high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a
of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or
overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue.  But though
passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a
please, and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves you there
professor.  Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded for ever.
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the
reveries.  Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads;
robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other
shepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him.  Go visit the
ship were now out of sight of land?  Why did the old Persians hold the sea
sleepy smoke.  Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to
some looking over the bulwarks glasses!
still better seaward peep.  But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up
story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild image
that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to grow hazy about the
the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?  Once more.  Say, you
the picture lies thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs
try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical
ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key to it all.  Now, when I say
when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies--what
yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first told that you and your

     I stuffed a shirt or two into my old
--the Tyre of this Carthage; --the place where the first dead American whale
.. < chapter ii 24  THE CARPET-BAG >
.. <p 6 >
.. <p 6 >
.. <p 7 >
Bedford.  It was on a Saturday night in December.  Much was I disappointed
Pacific.  Quitting the good city of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New
Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk; the
a choice resulting from my own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.
about
and cheerless.  I knew no one in the place.  With anxious grapnels I had
and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces --though I
at the whales, in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a
being cunningly presented to me under various disguises, induced me to set
boisterous something about everything connected with that famous old island,
but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote.  I
came such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice
cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that I recall all the
carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and started for Cape Horn and the
chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
circumstances, I think I can see a little into the springs and motives which
don't be too particular.  With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed
dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards the north
following before me in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port,
forth, partly laden with imported cobble-stones --so goes the story --to throw
from before the house, for everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches
gradually monopolizing the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor
harpoon from the bowsprit?  Now having a night, a day, and still another night
himself.  Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity.
is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with
it became a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile.  It
it--would they let me --since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all
love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts.  Not ignoring what
made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a fine,
managers, the Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage,
marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my
most of them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.
most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling
old Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original
open, and in the wild conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two
performing the part I did, besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was
sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver, --So,
stop at this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as
that no way of reaching that place would offer, till the following Monday.  As
the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan?  And
the inmates of the place one lodges in.  By reason of these things, then, the
the sign of The Crossed Harpoons --but it looked too expensive and jolly
there floated into my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid
there.  Further on, from the bright red windows of the Sword-Fish Inn, there
to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price, and
undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all the attending
upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and
was a very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold
was stranded.  Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen,
well be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing.  For my mind was
whaling voyage was welcome; the great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung
when others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short
where but from Nantucket, too, did that first adventurous little sloop put
wherever you go, Ishmael, said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of a
which amazingly pleased me.  Besides though New Bedford has of late been
wish.  With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements;
with the darkness towards the south --wherever in your wisdom you may conclude

     Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn,
.. < chapter iii 14  THE SPOUTER-INN >
.. <p 10 >
.. <p 10 >
.. <p 11 >
.. <p 12 >
Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be moored to one of
England hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched.  But by dint of
Some were storied weapons.  With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed,
The original iron entered
altogether unwarranted.  But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long,
and run away with by a whale, years afterward slain off the Cape of Blanco.
as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could ever have
be.
centre of the picture over three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a
clean over the craft, is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the
combat of the four primal elements. --It's a blasted heath. --It's a Hyperborean
come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild, might not be
defaced, that in the unequal cross-lights by which you viewed it, it was
dismantled masts alone visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing to spring
does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish?  even the great
down lengthwise along the line of the equator; yea, ye
drinks the tepid tears of orphans.  But no more of this blubbering now, we are
fifty years ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a
first you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in the time of the New
glittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of
gods!  go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost?  Now,
going a-whaling, and there is plenty of that yet to come.  Let us scrape the
gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking, horrifying implement.  Mixed with
heathenish array of monstrous clubs and spears.  Some were thickly set with
human hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round like
ice from our frosted feet, and see what sort of a place this Spouter may
in a great hurricane; the half-foundered ship weltering there with its three
inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way arrive at an understanding
involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out what that marvellous
last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous something in the
leviathan himself?  In fact, the artist's design seemed this: a final theory
limber, portentous, black mass of something hovering in the
made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a temperance society, he only
much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, and especially by
nameless yeast.  A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a
nervous man distracted.  Yet was there a sort of indefinite, half-attained,
nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a man,
not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here?  Would he not far rather lay him
of its purpose.  such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at
of my own, partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons
only by diligent study and a series of systematic visits to it, and careful
painting meant.  Ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dart
picture's midst.  That once found out, and all the rest were plain.  But stop;
side hung a very large oil-painting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way
sunset.  And that harpoon--so like a corkscrew now--was flung in Javan seas,
that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the door of
the Moluccas.  Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar in an ice palace
the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower.  You shuddered
these were rusty old whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed.
three mast-heads.  The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a
throwing open the little window towards the back of the entry, you at last
unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze you to it, till you
wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks of some condemned old craft.  On one
winter scene. --It's the breaking-up of the ice-bound stream of Time.  But at
with whom I conversed upon the subject.  The picture represents a Cape-Horner
you found yourself in a wide, low, straggling entry with old-fashioned
you through. --It's the Black Sea in a midnight gale. --It's the unnatural
.. <p 15 >
.. <p 16 >
Bulkington!  Bulkington!  where's Bulkington?  and darted out of the house in
They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first house they
a harpooneer, then your objections indefinitely multiply.  Nor was there any
a little plan that had occurred to me just previous to the entrance of the
about that harpooneer. -- I shan't sleep with him.  I'll try the bench here.
an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger
and it's a plaguy rough board here --feeling of the knots and notches.  But
ashore.  To be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have
at once; and since the sea-gods had ordained that he should soon become my
away unobserved, and I saw no more of him till he became my comrade on the
beards stiff with icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador.
bedwards.  Suppose now, he should tumble in upon me at midnight --how could I
brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in
coffer-dam.  I have seldom seen such brawn in a man.  His face was deeply
concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of him.  He stood
earthly reason why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody
else; for sailors no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do
enough.  So saying he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchief
entered.  No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the whale's
first dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed, the while
full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a
give him much joy.  His voice at once announced
got a carpenter's plane there in the bar --wait, I say, and I'll make ye snug
grinning like an ape.  The shavings flew right and left; till at last the
harpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the
he refrained from making as much noise as the rest.  This man interested me
he swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never
heads muffled in woollen comforters, all bedarned and ragged, and their
heads, as it generally does even with the arrantest topers newly landed from
heard in the entry; the door was flung open, and in rolled a wild set of
it seems, for some reason a huge favorite with them, they raised a cry of
it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going
just as you please; i'm sorry i cant spare ye a tablecloth for a mattress,
like to be private when they are sleeping.  And when it comes to sleeping with
mariners enough.  Enveloped in their shaggy watch coats, and with their
mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador, or
mouth --the bar --when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating, soon
now we'll have the latest news from the Feegees.  A tramping of sea boots was
on the weather side of an ice-island.  The liquor soon mounted into their
one of those tall mountaineers from the Alleganian Ridge in Virginia.  When
own skin.  The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated
plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot.  The landlord was near
poured them out brimmers all round.  One complained of a bad cold in his head,
pursuit of him.  It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almost
rather not sleep with your own brother.  I don't know how it is, but people
sea, and they began capering about most obstreperously.  I observed, however,
sea.  In a few minutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates, and being,
seamen.  No man prefers to sleep two in a bed.  In fact, you would a good deal
shipmate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is
spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober face, yet upon the whole
spraining his wrist, and I told him for heaven's sake to quit -- the bed was
supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate myself upon
tell from what vile hole he had been coming?  Landlord!  I've changed my mind
that he was a Southerner, and from his fine stature, I thought he must be
that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though he seemed desirous not to
the deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to
the revelry of his companions had mounted to its height, this man slipped
the thought of sleeping with him.  It was fair to presume that being a
tidiest, certainly none of the finest.  I began to twitch all over.  Besides,
upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses, which
wait a bit, Skrimshander; I've
your own hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your

     But come, it's getting dreadful late, you had better be turning flukes --it's
.. <p 19 >
.. <p 20 >
After
Johnny in the foot of it.  But I got a dreaming and sprawling about one night,
Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal
There's plenty room for two to kick about in that bed; it's an almighty big
Zealand heads (great curios, you know), and he's sold all on 'em but one,
a bit of glass stuck against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my
a door mat, and parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of
a nice bed: Sal and me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced.
abreast.  There, said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea
and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came near breaking his arm.
and that one he's trying to sell to-night, cause to-morrow's Sunday, and it
bed that.  Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam and little
bed.  But what is this on the chest?  I took it up, and held it close to the
breath, that's a purty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and
business as selling the heads of dead idolators?  Depend upon it, landlord,
centre table, could see no other furniture belonging to the place, but a
chest that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; there, make
come to anchor somewhere --come along then; do come; won't ye come?  I
considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
goin' out of the door with four heads strung on a string, for all the airth
guise?  I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being
hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one corner; also a large
has just arrived from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of 'balmed New
he exclaimed I vum it's Sunday --you won't see that harpooneer to-night; he's
jiffy; and so saying he lighted a candle and held it towards me, offering to
land trunk.  Likewise, there was a parcel of outlandish bone fish hooks on the
large door mat, ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something
lead the way.  But I stood irresolute; when looking at a clock in the corner,
liable to a criminal prosecution.  Wall, said the landlord, fetching a long
life.  I tore myself out of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink in
light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at
like a string of inions.  This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable
like the stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin.  There was a hole
me --but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out a
mysterious harpooneer had been wearing it of a rainy day.  I went up in it to
mystery, and showed that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling
no idea of sleeping with a madman; and you, sir, you I mean, landlord, you,
or slit in the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South American
over the bed.  Though none of the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny
ponchos.  But could it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into
prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to sleep
rude shelf, the four walls, and a papered fireboard representing a man
seaman's bag, containing the harpooneer's wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a
shelf over the fire-place, and a tall harpoon standing at the head of the
sir, by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, would thereby render yourself
some satisfactory conclusion concerning it.  I can compare it to nothing but a
striking a whale.  Of things not properly belonging to the room, there was a
that harpooneer is a dangerous man.  He pays reg'lar, was the rejoinder.
that, Sal said it wouldn't do.  Come along here, I'll give ye a glim in a
the bed, but he had disappeared.  Folding back the counterpane, I stooped
the neck.  I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about
then.  But be easy, be easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin' you of
this head-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat.  After thinking some time on
to churches.  He wanted to, last Sunday, but I stopped him just as he was
tolerably well.  I then glanced round the room; and besides the bedstead and
true I take to be good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I've
uncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a
would not do to be sellin' human heads about the streets when folks is goin'
yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye.  I turned round from eyeing

     Don't be afraid now, said he, grinning again.  Queequeg here wouldn't harm
.. <p 23 >
.. <p 24 >
I concluded that it must be nothing but a wooden idol, which indeed it
I kill-e!  again growled the cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the
Remembering the embalmed head, at first I almost thought that this black
Watch!  Coffin!  Angels!  save me!  Speak-e!  tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me,
a hair of your head.  Stop your grinning, shouted I, and why didn't you
aboard of a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian
about in the most unnatural manner.  At last extinguishing the fire, he took
and ashes a little, he made a polite offer of it to the little negro.  But the
as carelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.  All these
be, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again.  But his
between the andirons.  the chimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very
biscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled the shavings
came into the room light in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him.
clouds of tobacco smoke.  The next moment the light was extinguished, and
country.  I quaked to think of it.  A peddler of heads too --perhaps the heads
dark.  Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin!  shouted I.  Landlord!
dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the
else singing some pagan psalmody or other, during which his face twitched
exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations, and jumping
fire, and still hastier
follow.  First he takes about a double handful of shavings out of his grego
from him against the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might
guttural noises from the devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or
guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my
he at last succeeded in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat
he began feeling me.  Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away
hidden image, feeling but ill at ease meantime --to see what was next to
holding it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed out great
if a parcel of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms.  It
interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one.  Taking up his
into a sacrificial blaze.  Presently, after many hasty snatches into the
into bed with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before the light
it with a sticking-plaster shirt.  Still more, his very legs were marked, as
kill-e.  And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the
little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never
manikin was a real baby preserved in some similar manner.  But seeing that it
meaning.  Who-e debel you? --he at last said -- you no speak-e, dam-me, I
moved his lips.  All these strange antics were accompanied by still stranger
must indeed be a heathen.  Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or
my linen would get on fire.  But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord
of his own brothers.  He might take a fancy to mine --heavens!  look at that
on its back, and exactly the color of a three days' old Congo baby.
or chapel for his Congo idol.  I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half
pocket, and places them carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of ship
pockets, and produced at length a curious little deformed image with a hunch
proved to be.  For now the savage goes up to the empty fireplace, and removing
queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and seeing him now
sang out, I could not help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment
something that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me that he
sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little shrine
the idol up very unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket
the papered fire-board, sets up this little hunchbacked image, like a tenpin,
this wild cannibal, tomahawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me.  I
tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for an instant, and then
tomahawk scattered the hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought
tomahawk!  But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about
was not at all limber, and that it glistened a good deal like polished ebony,
was now quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped
was put out, to break the spell into which I had so long been bound.  But the
withdrawals of his fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly),


     I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently, he drew back his arm,
     Queequeg! --but his only answer was a snore.  I then rolled over, my neck
-- he hunted up his boots.  What under the heavens he did it for, I cannot
--under the bed; when, from sundry violent
.. <p 27 >
.. <p 28 >
At last, he emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his
Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings now, and
Nevertheless, a man like Queequeg you don't see every day, he and his ways
Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the
a tomahawk!  Queequeg! --in the name of goodness, Queequeg, wake!  At length,
apartment to myself.  Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a
as he was, he still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part
beaver hat, a very tall one, by the by, and then --still minus his trowsers
bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature.  When, at last, his mind
by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant expostulations upon the
closely seated by my bedside.  For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay
consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning over him.
dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
enough civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible
eyes, and began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much
feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly felt a slight scratch.
for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts
from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and
gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself;
great rudeness; staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette
had not been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have
he did not altogether remember how I came to be there, though a dim
in fixed reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament.  For
in the transition state -- neither caterpillar nor butterfly.  He was just
it.  Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the
manner.  his education was not yet completed.  He was an undergraduate.  If he
me.  But at length all the past night's events soberly recurred, one by one,
motions; for the time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding.
placed in mine.  My arm hung over the counterpane, and the nameless,
polite they are.  I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he
private when putting on his boots.  But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature
savage's side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby.  A pretty pickle, truly,
savage, he never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on.
seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he became, as it
sense of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially
shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat
signs and sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he would
spell would be broken.  I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away
supernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to those
tell, but his next movement was to crush himself --boots in hand, and hat on
there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand;
though I tried to move his arm --unlock his bridegroom clasp --yet, sleeping
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be
thought I; abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with a cannibal and
to explain the mystery.  Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with
treated me with so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty of
troubled himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a
unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that matrimonial sort of style,
unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed
up in bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if
us twain.  I now strove to rouse him --
very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate
were well worth unusual regarding.  He commenced dressing at top by donning his
were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain
which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg's pagan arm thrown round
yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid

     If I had been astonished at first catching a
.. < chapter vi 11  THE STREET >
.. <p 31 >
.. <p 31 >
.. <p 32 >
Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft which
Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle
But that was certainly very coolly done by him, and every
I cannot say much for his breeding.  His greatest admirer could not have
Look there!  that chap strutting round the corner.  He wears a beaver hat and
There weekly arrive in this town scores of green Vermonters and New Hampshire
all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some good stories about
all, down the throat of the tempest.  But think not that this famous town has
and at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the
another with a sou'-wester and a bombazine cloak.  No town-bred dandy will
beefsteaks, done rare.  Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew like
besides the Feegeeans, Tongatabooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians, and
bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats; straps
cannibals stand chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom
compare with a country-bred one -- I mean a downright bumpkin dandy --a fellow
cordially justified his bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him, and
curious, certainly more comical.
each other as though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among
eschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to
genteelly.  We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here; how he
glimpse of so outlandish an individual as Queequeg circulating among the
great whales on the high seas --entire strangers to them --and duelled them dead
imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him.
last-mentioned haunts you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual
men, all athirst for gain and glory in the fishery.  They are mostly young,
natives.  But New Bedford beats all Water street and Wapping.  In these
of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop
one knows that in most people's estimation, to do anything coolly is to do it
only harpooneers, cannibals, and bumpkins to show her visitors.  Not at all.
polite society of a civilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon
reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that after we were
sallied out for a stroll.
set of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded
should see the comical things he does upon reaching the seaport.  In
silence.  And not only that, but they looked embarrassed.  Yes, here were a
straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven, straps, buttons, and
swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife.  Here comes
taking my first daylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford.  In
tanning his hands.  Now when a country dandy like this takes it into his head
that, in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in buckskin gloves for fear of
the Green Mountains.  A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid
the affrighted ladies.  Regent street is not unknown to Lascars and Malays;
the axe and snatch the whale-lance.  Many are as green as the Green Mountains
the head of the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle.  To be sure
the rest into the public room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting
the same calling, all of kindred tastes --looking round as sheepishly at
there quietly digesting and smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I
thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently offer
to his canvas trowsers.  Ah, poor Hay-Seed!  how bitterly will burst those
to make a distinguished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you
to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts.  Even in
unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more
using it there without ceremony; reaching over the table with it, to the
warrior whalemen!  But as for Queequeg --why, Queequeg sat there among them --at
whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man maintained a profound
whence they came.  In some things you would think them but a few hours old.
without winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table --all of
yet carry on their bones unholy flesh.  It makes a stranger stare.  But,

     I had not been seated very long ere a man
--here, here lies my beloved; ye know not the desolation that broods in bosoms
.. < chapter viii 2  THE PULPIT >
.. <p 36 >
.. <p 37 >
Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems -- aye,
Eternity.  But what then?  Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of
In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included; why it
Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures upon immortals; in what eternal,
Life and Death.  Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my
Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine.  But somehow I grew merry again.
a stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet.  Yes, there is death in this
among whom he was a very great favorite.  He had been a sailor and a
are not without their meanings.  But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the
ashes!  What despair in those immovable inscriptions!  What deadly voids and
being.  In fact take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me.  And
bliss; why all the living so strive to hush all the dead; wherefore but the
business of whaling --a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom --the spring verdure peeping
chaplain.  Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple, so called by the whalemen,
comforted for those who we nevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable
congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the
darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me,
dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing among flowers can say
died sixty round centuries ago; how it is that we still refuse to be
door flew back upon admitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all
fishery, and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shone
forth even beneath February's snow.  No one having previously heard his
grave.  As well might those tablets stand in the cave of Elephanta as here.
harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had dedicated his life to the
he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth; why the Life
history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple without the utmost
how it is that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we
in his countenance.  This savage was the only person present who seemed to
is that a universal proverb says of them, that
like oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking that thick
like these.  What bitter blanks in those black-bordered marbles which cover no
ministry.  At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the hardy winter
needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a Nantucket
notice my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read, and,
of a certain venerable robustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted
of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems merging into a second
of the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among the
prefix so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if
refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly perished without a
rumor of a knocking in a tomb will terrify a whole city.  All these things
solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity
tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.  Oh!  ye whose
the congregation, sufficiently attested that this fine old man was the
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before me
therefore three cheers for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body
therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall.  Whether any
they tell no tales, though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands;
tombs, and even from these dead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.  It
true substance.  Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much
turning sideways was surprised to see Queequeg near me.  Affected by the
unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and
unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who
voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky light of that
water the thinnest of air.  Methinks my body is but the lees of my better
were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak
when they will, for stave my soul, Jove himself cannot.


     Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of
     He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that's bound for
-- The ribs and terrors in the whale, Arched over me a dismal gloom, While
.. <p 40 >
.. <p 41 >
I called my God, When I could scarce believe him mine, He bowed his ear to my
Jonah -- And God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.  Shipmates,
Joppa, the modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the
Mediterranean, the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles
Midships!  midships!  There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the
Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men,
Spain; as far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in
Tarshish.  There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here.  By all
The face of my Deliverer God.  My song for ever shall record That terrible,
a hard command.  But all the things that God would have us do are hard for us
a noble thing is that canticle in the fish's belly!  How billow-like and
about us!  But what is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the modern Cadiz.  That's
again, and every eye on the preacher.  He paused a little; then kneeling in
all God's sun-lit waves rolled by, And lift me deepening down to doom.  I saw
and a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God.  As sinful men, it is a
and offered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying at
benches, and a still slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet
boisterously grand!  We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with him to
closed eyes,
complaints -- No more the whale did me confine.  With speed he flew to my
continual tolling of a bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog --in
disobeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying God consists.  With
does Jonah's deep sealine sound!  what a pregnant lesson to us is this
finally the deliverance and joy of Jonah.  As with all sinners among men,
gangway, there!  side away to larboard--larboard gangway to starboard!
howling of the storm.  A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned over
into countries where God does not reign, but only the Captains of this earth.
lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness,
man!  Oh!  most contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and
of God --never mind now what that command was, or how conveyed --which he found
page, said: Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter of
persuade.  And if we obey God, we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this
power.  Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the
prophet!  What
relief, As on a radiant dolphin borne; Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone
seeking to flee from Him.  He thinks that a ship made by men, will carry him
strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures.  Yet what depths of the soul
such tones he commenced reading the following hymn; but changing his manner
suddenly awakened fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and
that joyful hour; I give the glory to my God, His all the mercy and the
the bottom of the sea.  This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the
the kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is
the leaves of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper
the opening maw of hell, With endless pains and sorrows there; Which none but
the opinion of learned men.  And where is Cadiz, shipmates?  Cadiz is in
the pulpit's bows, folded his large brown hands across his chest, uplifted his
the sin of this son of Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command
then, shipmates, that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God?  Miserable
they that feel can tell-- Oh, I was plunging to despair.  In black distress,
this book, containing only four chapters --four yarns --is one of the smallest
this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at God, by
those ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea.  Because
to do --remember that --and hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to
to the westward from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar.  See ye not
towards the concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy
unassuming authority ordered the scattered people to condense.  Starboard



     That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers!  the contraband
     infallibly straight itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels
     the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowel's wards.  Screwed at
.. <p 44 >
.. <p 45 >
Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward
Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep.  And
a Hebrew," he cries --and then --"I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who hath
again towards the tormented deep.  Terrors upon terrors run shouting through
among which it hung.  The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his
and every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah's head; in all
and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come
and there's naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestlings in his berth,
answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him.  "I am
be passed; and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals
berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
billow leaping over the bulwarks.  Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship,
boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are
chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!"  Like one who after a night of
clattering overboard; when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling,
cry, Jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud,
deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to sea.
dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break.  But now when the
drunken revelry hies to his bed, still reeling, but with conscience yet
fear the Lord God then!  Straightway, he now goes on to make a full
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance.  But that contradiction in
furiously they mob him with their questions.  "What is thine occupation?
her affrighted face from the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast
high Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose cause this great
him, and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matter to
his soul.  In all his cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly
its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in Jonah's
known.  The sailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions of
last bales received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion, still
likewise another answer to a question not put by them, but the unsolicited
made the sea and the dry land!"  Fear him, O Jonah?  Aye, well mightest thou
maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room; though, in truth,
meanest thou, O sleeper!  arise!"  Startled from his lethargy by that direful
more appals him.  The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are all awry.  "Oh!  so
my conscience hangs in me!" he groans, "straight upward, so it burns; but the
nigh to drowning while yet afloat.  And ever, as the white moon shows
now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and from the
over him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is the wound,
pricking him, as the plungings of the Roman race-horse but so much the more
raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he
room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of the
strike his steel tags into him; as one who in that miserable plight still
tempest was upon them.  The lot is Jonah's; that discovered, then how
the behavior of poor Jonah.  The eager mariners but ask him who he is, and
the far rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving
the frightened master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear, "What
the lamp more and
the seas after him.  Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of
the ship --a berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep.  But
this raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep.  He sees no black sky and
to look out upon the sea.  But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther
turns and turns in giddy anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit
was jonah.  but the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.  A
water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that stifling hour, when
whence comest thou?  thy country?  what people?" but mark now, my shipmates,
where from; whereas, they not only receive an answer to those questions, but


     Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the
     Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonor!  Woe to him who would not
--chiefly known to me by Thy rod --mortal or immortal, here I die.  I have
--top-gallant delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the
.. < chapter X 24  A BOSOM FRIEND >
.. <p 48 >
.. <p 48 >
.. <p 49 >
Almighty's bidding.  And what was that, shipmates?  To preach the Truth to the
Chapel, I found Queequeg there quite alone; he having left the Chapel before
He drooped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his face to
Lord his God, and is only a patriot to heaven.  Delight is to him, whom all
Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not altogether maim.  He looked like
You cannot hide the soul.  Through all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I
a large number of fifties being found together, that his astonishment at the
a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor.  Whether it was,
a sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the
and woe to that pilot of the living God who slights it.  Woe to him whom this
be his, who coming to lay him down, can say with his final breath --O Father!
be true, even though to be false were salvation!  Yea, woe to him who, as the
black and bold, there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare a thousand
brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it otherwise would, this I
commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self.  Delight
covered his face with his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the
deep.  Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low?  Delight is to
devils.  And besides all this, there was a certain lofty bearing about the
enthusiasm, -- but oh!  shipmates!  on the starboard hand of every woe, there is
face of Falsehood!  That was it!  This, shipmates, this is that other lesson;
face that little negro idol of his; peering hard into its face, and with a
from this sure Keel of the Ages.  And eternal delight and deliciousness will
giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment.  He would
great Pilot Paul has it, while preaching to others is himself a castaway!
him --a far, far upward, and inward delight --who against the proud gods and
his countenance yet had a something in it which was by no means disagreeable.
his feet on the stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his
his heathenish way.  But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and
is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming to himself in
lap began counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth
multitude of pages was excited.  With much interest I sat watching him.  Savage
no quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he
nothing; I leave eternity to Thee; for what is man that he should live out
page --as I fancied --stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and
people had departed, and he was left alone in the place.
pluck it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges.  Delight,
pretty
rather than to appal!  Woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness!
saw the traces of a simple honest heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery
soon, going to the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his
striven to be Thine, more than to be this world's, or mine own.  Yet this is
the benediction some time.  He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with
the lifetime of his God?  He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction,
the waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake
them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly
then begin again at the next fifty; seeming to commence at number one each
though he was, and hideously marred about the face --at least to my taste --
time, as though he could not count more than fifty, and it was only by such
too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawn out in freer and
treacherous world has gone down beneath him.  Delight is to him, who gives
waters when God has brewed them into a gale!  Woe to him who seeks to please
woe is
world charms from Gospel duty!  Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the


     For this reason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire,
     We had lain thus in bed, chatting and
.. < chapter xi 24  NIGHTGOWN >
.. <p 52 >
.. <p 52 >
.. <p 53 >
Church.  How then could I unite with
God.  Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.  And what do I wish that this Queequeg
and earth --pagans and all included --can possibly be jealous of an
and smoke, we went to our room together.  He made me a present of his
and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of doors; indeed out of
and we felt like getting up again, though day-break was yet some way down the
be comfortable any more.  But if, like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip
bed for confidential disclosures between friends.  Man and wife, they say,
bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire in the room.  The more so, I
bending over them, as if our knee-pans were warming-pans.  We felt very nice
cold, for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by
confabulations, what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed,
contrast.  Nothing exists in itself.  If you flatter yourself that you are all
crouching manner for some time, when all at once I thought I would open my
embalmed head; took out his enormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the
eyes; for when between sheets, whether by day or by night, and whether
fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to me -- that is the will of
for me to join him; but well knowing what was to follow, I deliberated a
future.  Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent
good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian
head-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our two noses
hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg --a cosy, loving pair.
his brown tattooed legs over mine, and then drawing them back; so entirely
idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed before him twice or
idolator.  So I kindled the shavings; helped prop up the innocent little
in the general consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm.
insignificant bit of black wood?  Impossible!  But what is worship? --to do the
moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply or otherwise.  I was a
napping at short intervals, and Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing
of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled, why then, indeed,
often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning.  Thus, then, in our
over comfortable, and have been so a long time, then you cannot be said to
paper fireboard.  By certain signs and symptoms, I thought he seemed anxious
peace with our own consciences and all the world.  But we did not go to sleep
position began to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves
savage those old rules would not apply.  After supper, and another social chat
say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth, some small part of you must be
silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets.  I let them stay.  He
sitting up; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the
sociable and free and easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our
table, and mechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one of
them towards me, and said it was mine.  I was going to remonstrate; but he
then went about his evening prayers, took out his idol, and removed the
there open the very bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples
this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you and
this wild idolator in worshipping his piece of wood?  But what is worship?
thought I. Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven
thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and went to bed, at
tobacco, drew out some thirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on the
warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal.  We had been sitting in this
which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich.  For the height of
will of God -- that is worship.  And what is the will of God? --to do to my
without some little chat.  How it is I know not; but there is no place like a
worship.  consequently, i must then unite with him in his; ergo, I must turn
would do to me?  Why, unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of
your snugness and the cold of the outer air.  Then there you lie like the one

     wheelbarrow next morning, Monday, after disposing of
.. < chapter xiii 2  WHEELBARROW >
.. <p 56 >
.. <p 57 >
Christians could be both miserable and wicked; infinitely more so, than all
He answered no, not yet; and added that he was fearful Christianity, or
I told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my intention
Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own harpoon.  Shifting
Thought he, it's a wicked world in all meridians; I'll die a pagan.
and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs.  I asked him why
and thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians, wore
assented; for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was an
at Queequeg so much --for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their
bill; using, however, my comrade's money.  The grinning landlord, as well as
ended with his pipe's last dying puff, Queequeg embraced me, pressed his
experienced harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great usefulness
for his own harpoon, because it was of assured stuff, well tried in many a
forehead against mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over from each
had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed iron was in lieu of a sceptre
hammock, away we went down to the Moss, the little Nantucket packet
he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore, and whether all whaling
he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans.  They
heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and Queequeg now
him, though now some time from home.  By hints, I asked him whether he did
his father dead and gone, he being very old and feeble at the last accounts.
his father's heathens.  Arrived at last in old Sag Harbor; and seeing what
his untutored countrymen.  For at bottom --so he told me --he was actuated by a
his, boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds.  To all this I joyously
it seems, had lent him one,
many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the farmers' meadows armed with
mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales.  In short, like
movements.  He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation.  Upon this,
not propose going back, and having a coronation; since he might now consider
now.  I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.
people still happier than they were; and more than that, still better than
profound desire to learn among the Christians, the arts whereby to make his
rather Christians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled
return, --as soon as he felt himself baptized again.  For the nonce, however,
same mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in
schooner moored at the wharf.  As we were going along the people stared; not
ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the
ships did not find their own harpoons.  To this, in substance, he replied,
spent their wages in that place also, poor Queequeg gave it up for lost.
sprung up between me and Queequeg -- especially as Peter Coffin's cock and bull
stories about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person
streets, -- but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms.  But we
that though what I hinted was true enough, yet he had a particular affection
the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about the first
the boarders, seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had
the embalmed head to a barber, for a block, I settled my own and comrade's
the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket, and seeing how they
their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish.  Hence the queer ways about
their own scythes --though in no wise obliged to furnished them -- even so,
they were.  But, alas!  the practices of whalemen soon convinced him that even
things, including my own poor carpet-bag, and Queequeg's canvas sack and
throne of thirty pagan Kings before him.  But by and by, he said, he would
to one, who, like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though
to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port for an adventurous
well acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.  His story being
whaleman to embark from.  He at once resolved to accompany me to that island,
wheelbarrow he had ever seen.  It was in Sag Harbor.  The owners of his ship,
whom I now companied with.  We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our



     Hallo, you sir, cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking up to
     He say, said I, that you came near kill-e that man there, pointing to the
     Nothing more happened on the passage worthy
.. < chapter xiv 23  NANTUCKET >
.. <p 60 >
.. <p 61 >
.. <p 61 >
.. <p 62 >
Eddystone lighthouse.  Look at it --a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all
Nantucket!  Take out your map and look at it.  See what a real corner of the
Queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!  Look you,
Queequeg, what in thunder do you mean by that?  Don't you know you might have
almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant seemed on the point of
and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the boom as it swept
around him, seemed to be saying to himself -- It's a mutual, joint-stock
as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale.  In the midst of this
beach, without a background.  There is more sand there than you would use in
begged his pardon.  From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea,
being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood eyeing the boom
boom to stay it, seemed madness.  It flew from right to left, and back again,
boom was now flying from side to side, completely sweeping the entire after
bumpkin was restored.  All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain
bumpkin, running towards that officer; Capting, Capting, here's the devil.
clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist, darted from
consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and crawling under the
face into an unearthly expression of disdain, ah!  him bevy small-e fish-e;
from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies.  He only asked for water --fresh
from the water, Queequeg now took an instant's glance around him, and
grow naturally; that they import Canada thistles; that they have to send
his feet, while Queequeg, turning his back upon him, lighted his tomahawk
killed that chap?  What him say?  said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.
lighted his pipe, and leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those
minutes more, and he rose again, one arm still striking out, and with the
minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing his long arms
other dragging a lifeless form.  The boat soon picked them up.  The poor
over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way trapped, and all
part of the deck.  The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was
path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end to the bulwarks,
pipe and passed it to me for a puff.  Capting!  Capting!  yelled the
roared the Captain, I'll kill-e you, you cannibal, if you try any more of
seeming to see just how matters were, dived down and disappeared.  A few
snapping into splinters.  Nothing was done, and nothing seemed capable of
still shivering greenhorn.  Kill-e, cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed
straight out before him, and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through
strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-sheet, and the tremendous
swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to attempt snatching at the
tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon
tell you that they have to plant weeds there, they don't
that it was high time for the Captain to mind his own eye.  The prodigious
the freezing foam.  I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one
the mentioning; so, after a fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.
the side with a long living arc of a leap.  For three
till poor Queequeg took his last long dive.  Was there ever such
to be saved.  The greenhorn had gone down.  Shooting himself perpendicularly
twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper.  Some gamesome wights will
unconsciousness?  He did not seem to think that he at all deserved a medal
was safe.  The schooner was run into the wind, and while the hands were
water -- something to wipe the brine off; that done, he put on dry clothes,
world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the
world, in all meridians.  We cannibals must help these Christians.
your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.  But it so happened just then,




     Come on, Queequeg, said I, all right.  There's Mrs. Hussey.
     Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the word cod with great emphasis,
     clam for two, disappeared.  Queequeg, said I, do you think that we can
     hand, whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard.
.. <p 65 >
.. <p 66 >
And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving Mrs.
However, by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and then
Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs.  Upon making known our
Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen, and bawling out
Hussey's clam and cod announcement, I thought I would try a little experiment.
Oh, sweet friends!  hearken to me.  It was made of small juicy clams, scarcely
about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white
and resumed my seat.  In a few moments the savory steam came forth again, but
before us.  We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the
better than try pot-luck at the Try Pots.  But the directions he had given us
bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuit, and salted pork cut
black, and suspended by asses' ears, swung from the cross-trees of an old
bowl, thinks I to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the
church to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we
clammy reception in the winter time, ain't it, Mrs Hussey?  But being in a
desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for
for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word clam, Mrs.
freckled woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of
great expedition: when leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs.
great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple shirt, who was waiting
him, and the chowder being surpassingly excellent, we despatched it with
his chowders.  In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do
horns; yes, two of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.  It's ominous,
injured eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen
is that what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?  says I; but that's a rather cold and
knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at last came to
little like a gallows.  Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at
made a corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first
make out a supper for us both on one clam?  However, a warm savory steam from
man we met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very much
misgiving.  A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two remaining
moreover he had assured us that cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for
pair of prodigious black pots too!  Are these last throwing out oblique hints
politeness.  Clam or Cod?  she repeated.  A clam for supper?  a cold clam;
puzzled us at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the
said-- Clam or Cod?  What's that about Cods, ma'am?  said I, with much
seasoned with pepper and salt.  Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty
shirt.  Get along with ye, said she to the man, or I'll be combing ye!
something which there was no mistaking.  Two enormous wooden pots painted
the inn, under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an
the kitchen served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before us.  But
the present, ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
the time, but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague
thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port;
tombstones staring at me in the whalemen's chapel; and here a gallows!  and a
top-mast, planted in front of an old doorway.  The horns of the cross-trees
touching tophet?  I was called from these reflections by the sight of a
up into little flakes; the whole enriched with butter, and plentifully
voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his favorite fishing food before
were sawed off on the other side, so that this old top-mast looked not a
when that smoking chowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained.
with a different flavor, and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed
with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and
yellow warehouse --our first point of departure --must be left on the larboard


     her original grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both
     you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod.  She was a
.. <p 69 >
.. <p 70 >
Canterbury Cathedral where Beckett bled.  But to all these her old
French grenadier's, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.  Her
Japanese junks; butter-box galliots, and what not; but take my word for it,
Peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he commanded another vessel of his
Pequod, --this old Peleg, during the term of his chief-mateship, had built upon
Pottowotamie Sachem's head.  A triangular opening faced towards the bows of
and calms of all four oceans, her old hull's complexion was darkened like a
and pryed about the Devil-Dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit; and,
antiquities, were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild
apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck heavy with pendants
appearance of the elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old
authority, in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at
broad ends on the deck, a circle of these slabs laced together, mutually
business that for more than half a century she had followed.  Old Captain
carved buckler or bedstead.  She was
claw-footed look about her.  Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons
concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by his aspect
craft in your day, for aught I know; --squared-toed luggers; mountainous
decided that this was the very ship for us.  You may have seen many a quaint
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in
finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and then
first I saw nobody; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or
hereditary foe.  The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt
high;  consisting of the long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from
interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen from his continual
land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory.  Scorning a
like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw.  A
long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to fasten her
noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy!  All noble things are touched
of material and device, unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's
of polished ivory.  She was a thing of trophies.  A cannibal of a craft,
old hempen thews and tendons to.  Those thews ran not through base blocks of
on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving; and
only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles
own, and now a retired seaman, and one of the principal owners of the
particular, perhaps, about the
rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast.  It seemed only a
sailings in many hard gales, and always looking to windward; --for this
seamen, and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style;
seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the ship's work
ship of the old school, rather small if anything; with an old fashioned
sloped towards each other, and at the apex united in a tufted point, where
stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne.  Her ancient
stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.  There was nothing so very
suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of command.  He was seated
temporary erection used in port.  It was of a conical shape, some ten feet
the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic
the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like a top-knot on some old
the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right-whale.  Planted with their
the ship, so that the insider commanded a complete view forward.  And half
tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
tribe of Massachusetts Indians, now extinct as the ancient Medes.  I peered
tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies.  All round, her
turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that
unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw, with the
venerable bows looked bearded.  Her masts--cut somewhere on the coast of Japan,
where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale --her masts stood
with that.  Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having

     accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty language --that man
-- come along with ye.  And so saying, he led the way below deck into the
.. <p 73 >
.. <p 74 >
Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other shares,
Nantucket Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and the sight of many
Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers,
Quakers; they are Quakers with a vengeance.  So that there are instances among
Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.  And when these things unite
about the value of a timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the
adventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with these unoutgrown
ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease.  But, as yet we have not to
and the Pequod was as good a ship as any --I thought the best -- and all this I
annuitants; widows, fatherless children, and chancery wards; each owning
are called serious things, and indeed deemed those selfsame serious things
as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by a crowd of old
cabin.  seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and
consistency about worthy Captain Bildad.  Though refusing, from conscientious
do with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who, if indeed
go round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh?  Can't ye see the world where
great are made so through a certain morbidness.  Be sure of this, O young
had not only been originally educated according to the strictest sect of
here at the north, been led to think untraditionally and independently;
his vest.  Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack of common
if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what seems a half wilful
in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a globular brain and a
individual circumstances.  Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do,
invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed,
makes one in a whole nation's census --a mighty pageant creature, formed for
native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of
night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneath constellations never seen
noble tragedies.  Nor will it at all detract from him, dramatically regarded,
now repeated to Peleg.  Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness
over the weather bow, I perceived that the ship swinging to her anchor with
overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature.  For all men tragically
peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the Quaker, modified by
peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by
peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of character, not unworthy a
ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and seclusion of many long
prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding; not the
receiving all nature's sweet or savage impressions fresh from her own virgin
retired whaleman.  But unlike Captain Peleg --who cared not a rush for what
scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself had illimitably
ship.  People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels, the same
slightest variety that I could see.  Well, what's the report?  said Peleg
surprising figure.  It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with
the flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing towards the open ocean.  The
the island --and in childhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and
the most sanguinary of all sailors and whale-hunters.  They are fighting
the veriest of all trifles --Captain Bildad
them of men, who, named with Scripture names --a singularly common fashion on
things altogether alien and heterogeneous.  For some of these same Quakers are
think.  Well, what dost thou think then of seeing the world?  Do ye wish to
this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the
thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless
to ship me.  And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off, he added
unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn --all that had not moved this
voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help from
was a Quaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect; and to
water; considerable horizon though, and there's a squall coming up, I
way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest.
when I came back; what did ye see?  Not much, I replied -- nothing but
you stand?  I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would;




     Fiery pit!  fiery pit!  ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye
     I had heard something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony
     Thou knowest best, was the sepulchral reply, the seven hundred and
     Well, Captain Bildad, interrupted Peleg, what d'ye say, what lay shall we
.. <p 77 >
.. <p 78 >
Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters, I would afore now had
Bildad; how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod,
I thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would not
Peleg was vainly trying to mend a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my
The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay, Captain Peleg.  Thou Bildad!
a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to founder the largest
and board, for which I would not have to pay one stiver.  It might be thought
bound to hell.  Flukes and flames!  Bildad, say that again to me, and start
broad-shouldered make.  But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little
but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about shipping
consider the duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship-- widows and
corrupt, but lay--" Lay, indeed, thought I, and such a lay!  the seven
corrupt.  It was an exceedingly long lay that, indeed; and though from the
cried Peleg, Thou dost not want to swindle this young man!  he must have
distrustful about receiving a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore,
doubloons; and so I thought at the time.  Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,
farthing is a good deal less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold
for one, shall not lay up many lays here below, where moth and rust do
fortunes, and am quite content if the world is ready to board and lodge me,
give this young man?
greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end
hair and horns on.  Out of the cabin, ye canting, drab-colored son of a wooden
hands, especially as I now found him on board the Pequod, quite at home there
have been surprised had I been offered the 200th, considering I was of a
his book, Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth--
hundred and seventy-seventh!  Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I,
hundredth lay, I say.  Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly
i can't tell; but as thou art still an impenitent man, captain Peleg, I
in the cabin, and reading his Bible as if at his own fireside.  Now while
insult me.  It's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he's
is a pretty large number, yet, when you come to make a teenth of it, you
magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the
more than that.  Seven hundred and seventy-seventh, again said Bildad,
my soul-bolts, but I'll--I'll--yes, I'll swallow a live goat with all his
no small surprise, considering that he was such an interested party in these
orphans, many of them --and that if we too abundantly reward the labors of this
proceedings; Bildad never heeded us, but went on mumbling to himself out of
roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.  Blast ye, Captain
seventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it? -- "where moth and rust do
ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn.  Captain Peleg, said Bildad
sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg.
slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven
steadily, thy conscience may be drawing ten inches of water, or ten fathoms,
that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely fortune --and so it was, a
the three hundredth, said Peleg, do ye hear that, Bildad!  The three
the whole management of the ship's affairs to these two.  And I did not know
therefore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly
towards him said, Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must
treasure is, there will your heart be also.  I am going to put him down for
very poor way indeed.  But I am one of those that never take on about princely
while I am putting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud.  Upon the whole,
will then see, I say, that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a
without lifting his eyes; and then went on mumbling -- for where your
young man, we may be taking the bread from those widows and those orphans.



     As Queequeg's Ramadan, or Fasting and
     it's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad one.  So
--something like me --only there's a good deal more of him.  Aye, aye, I know
.. < chapter xvii 2  THE RAMADAN >
.. <p 81 >
.. <p 82 >
Ahab well; I've sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is--a
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for
Humiliation, was to continue all day, I did not choose to disturb him till
I softly through the key-hole: --all silent.  I say, Queequeg!  why don't you
alarmed.  I had allowed him such abundant time; I thought he might have had
alike --for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head, and sadly
all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was.  But I felt
all pass off.  And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young man,
an apoplectic fit.  I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into
an odd corner of the room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and
and no possible mistake.  Queequeg! --Queequeg! --all still.  Something must
and rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door; but
away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been incidentally revealed to
been a kind of moody --desperate moody, and savage sometimes; but that will
child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm in Ahab?  No, no,
christians should be charitable in these things, and not fancy ourselves so
concerning him.  And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for
content; and there let him rest.  All our arguing with him would not avail;
entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan; --but what of
footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets, bow down before the torso
good man --not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good man
good-bye to thee --and wrong not Captain Ahab, because he happens to have a
half-crazy conceits on these subjects.  There was Queequeg, now, certainly
have happened.  Apoplexy!  I tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly
heart to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or
him, but for I don't know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his leg.  And
his bleeding stump that brought that about, as any one might see.  I know,
it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at
let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us all --Presbyterians and Pagans
little out of his mind for a spell; but it was the sharp shooting pains in
me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness
my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his humanities!  As I walked
need mending.  Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances
no answer.  I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.  Queequeg, said
of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of the inordinate
possessions yet owned and rented in his name.  I say, we good Presbyterian
previous had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber.  That's
religious obligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in my
seldom or never goes abroad without it, therefore he must be inside here,
sinister one.  I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of
speak?  It's I--Ishmael.  But all remained still as before.  I began to grow
strange, thought I; but at any rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he
sweet, resigned girl.  Think of that; by that sweet girl that old man has a
that he was never very jolly; and I know that on the passage home, he was a
that?  Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I suppose; he seemed to be
the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.
the wall, but nothing more.  I was surprised to behold resting against the
those other creatures in certain parts of our earth, who with a degree of
too, that ever since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale, he's
towards night-fall; for I cherish the greatest respect towards everybody's
vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what not, because of their
wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg's harpoon, which the landlady the evening
what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
wicked name.  Besides, my boy, he has a wife --not three voyages wedded --a
yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I cannot at
.. <p 85 >
.. <p 86 >
I could not get into the faintest doze.  I had blown out the candle; and the
I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by this time Queequeg must
Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were
Queequeg, as if he had been screwed down to the floor.  But as soon as the
Queequeg.  But not a word did he reply.  Despairing of him, therefore, I
a plum-pudding voyage, as they called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in
a schooner or brig, confined to the north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean
an undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the
because that other person don't believe it also.  But when a man's religion
becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment to him; and, in fine,
before hinted, I have no objection to any person's religion, be it what it
cave in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
certainly have brought his Ramadan to a termination.  But no; there he was
determined to go to bed and to sleep; and no doubt, before a great while, he
do; for I knew the inferences without his further hinting them.  I had seen
don't believe it's very punctual then.  I went down to supper.  After sitting a
eaten that very evening.  No more, Queequeg, said I, shuddering; that will
expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in.  He said no;
father the king, on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy
first glimpse of sun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating
get up and have some supper.  You'll starve; you'll kill yourself,
had been killed by about two o'clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and
had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on.  For some time, do all I would,
he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it
hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.
high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him.  And
his forehead again against mine; and said his Ramadan was over.  Now, as I
jacket, and threw it over him, as it promised to be a very cold night; and he
joints, but with a cheerful look; limped towards me where I lay; pressed
just so I now did with Queequeg.  Queequeg, said I, get into bed now, and
just where I had left him; he had not stirred an inch.  I began to grow
last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes once a year; and I
lie and listen to me.  I then went on, beginning with the rise and progress
long time listening to the long stories of some sailors who had just come from
makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it
may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person,
mere thought of Queequeg--
more till break of day; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted
native island.  It must be so; yes, it's part of his creed, I suppose; 
necessarily be half-starved.  This is the reason why most dyspeptic
night in the same room with a wide awake pagan on his hams in this dreary,
not four feet off --sitting there in that uneasy position, stark alone in
notice my presence in any the slightest way.  I wonder, thought I, if this can
of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various religions of the
of wood on his head.  For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself;
only upon one memorable occasion.  It was after a great feast given by his
only); after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o'clock,
pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about
possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do they fast on their hams that way in his
present time, during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all these
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters.  In one
short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense.  I told him, too, that
stark nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
the cold and dark; this made me really wretched.  Think of it; sleeping all
there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room, holding a piece
this ridiculous Ramadan of his.  Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body
unaccountable Ramadan!  But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing
vexed with him; it seemed so downright senseless and insane to be sitting
well, then, let him rest; he'll get up sooner or later, no doubt.  It can't
word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on
would follow me.  But previous to turning in, I took my heavy bearskin




     Nantucket.  So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg
     Peleg!  Peleg!  said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, thou thyself, as
     Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship's papers.  We must have Hedgehog
.. <p 89 >
.. <p 90 >
Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the wrath to come; mind thine eye,
I myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to
I say; oh!  goodness gracious!  steer clear of the fiery pit!  Something of
Judgment then?  Hear him, hear him now, cried Peleg, marching across the
Peleg's obstinate mistake touching his appellative, it stood something like
Scriptural and domestic phrases.  Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg.  Tell me, when this same Pequod here had
When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon the
You see him?  well, spose him one whale eye, well, den!  and taking sharp
aim at it, he darted the iron right over old Bildad's broad brim, clean across
and he handles it about right.  I say, Quohog, or whatever your name is, did
and selecting one entitled The Latter Day Coming; or No Time to Lose, placed
and the judgment then?  What?  With all three masts making such an everlasting
bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the
cabin, and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets, -- hear him, all of
close vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway.
cried Peleg.  Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers --it takes the shark
dad whale dead.  Quick, Bildad, said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the
duty by thee; I am part owner of this ship, and feel concerned for the souls
fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a Belial bondsman.  Spurn the idol
frightened about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from
have the fear of death; how, then, can'st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when
huge pockets of his broad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts,
it in queequeg's hands, and then grasping them and the book with both his,
looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, Son of darkness, I must do my
mark?  But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken
of all its crew; if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly
out of 'em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish.  There
part in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the offered
pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart of a
queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so that through Captain
said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, spos-ee him whale-e eye; why,
side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried out in
signing, he turned to me and said, I guess Quohog there don't know how to
some such way as this: -- Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere?
something.  Come aboard, come aboard; never mind about the papers.  I say,
spoiling our harpooneer,
steadfastly eyeing Queequeg, and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the
tell Quohog there --what's that you call him?  tell Quohog to step along.  By
the Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good.  He got so
the great anchor, what a harpoon he's got there!  looks like good stuff that;
the ninetieth lay, and that's more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of
the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's language, heterogeneously mixed with
the ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight.  Now,
there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats.  Look ye, Quohog, we'll give ye
this: -- Quohog his mark.  Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and
thou went mate with Captain Ahab, did'st thou not think of Death and the
was soon enrolled among the same ship's company to which I myself belonged.
was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and
whales, for fear of after-claps in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones.
write, does he?  I say, Quohog, blast ye!  dost thou sign thy name or make thy
ye.  Think of that!  When every moment we thought the ship would sink!  Death
you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat?  did you ever strike a fish?





     A day or two passed, and there was great
     All about it, eh --sure you do? --all?  Pretty sure.  With finger pointed
     Elijah.  Elijah!  thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after
     My friend, said I, what all this gibberish of yours is about, I don't
     and on that side of it retraced our steps.  But Elijah passed on, without
'em!  Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye; I'm
.. < chapter xx 15  ALL ASTIR >
.. <p 93 >
.. <p 94 >
.. <p 94 >
I left the ship the day previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig;
Somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of
above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and looking back as I
activity aboard the pequod.  not only were the old sails being mended, but
all kinds of vague wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all connected with
all.  Any how, it's all fixed and arranged a'ready; and some sailors or
and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like stranger stood a moment, as if
and the voyage we had bound ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy
close.  Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his wigwam
damaged in the head.  But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship
did so, who should be seen but Elijah following us, though at a distance.
each other's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was
fit; and the silver calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when
for him --the likes of ye.  Morning to ye, shipmates, morning!  Oh, when ye get
half-revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me
his being behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see whether the
his leg.
important to tell us, out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle
in a troubled reverie; then starting a little, turned and said: -- Ye've
in short, everything betokened that the ship's preparations were hurrying to a
keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands: Bildad did all the purchasing and
know, and I don't much care; for it seems to me that you must be a little
let's leave this crazy man.  But stop, tell me your name, will you?
new sails were coming on board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging;
nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear.  But we had not gone perhaps
of me imagine.  This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting,
other must go with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men, God pity
providing at the stores; and the men employed in the hold and on the rigging
really dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg,
seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.
seeming to notice us.  This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it
shipped, have ye?  Names down on the papers?  Well, well, what's signed, is
signed; and what's to be, will be; and then again, perhaps it wont be, after
signing the articles, word was given at all the inns where the ship's company
sorry I stopped ye.  Look here, friend, said I, if you have anything
stranger would turn the same corner that we did.  He did; and then it seemed
the Pequod; and Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn
the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in him.  Morning to
there, tell 'em I've concluded not to make one of 'em.  Ah, my dear fellow,
there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss of
things.  I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was
to me that he was dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life
us, you are mistaken in your game; that's all I have to say.  And it's said
very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way; you are just the man
was no telling how soon the vessel might be sailing.  So Queequeg and I got
were stopping, that their chests must be on board before night, for there
were working till long after night-fall.  On the day following Queequeg's
ye, shipmates, morning.  Morning it is, said I. Come along, Queequeg,
you can't fool us that way --you can't fool us.  It is the easiest thing in




     It was nearly six o'clock, but only grey
     See if you can find 'em now, will ye?  Find who?  Morning to ye!  morning
     Very dim, very dim, said Elijah.  Morning to ye.  Once more we quitted him;
     Yes, I thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.
--but never mind, never mind --it's all one, all in the family too; --sharp
.. < chapter xxi 2  GOING ABOARD >
.. <p 98 >
.. <p 99 >
Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?  No, no, no; I wasn't
Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open.
He put his hand upon the sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it was soft
Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.  Ye be, be ye?  Coming back
Queequeg, don't sit there, said I. Oh!  perry dood seat, said Queequeg, my
Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.  Elijah, said I, you will
Seeing a light, we went down, and found only an old rigger there, wrapped in a
afore breakfast?  He's cracked, Queequeg, said I, come on.  Holloa!
and again marking the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we
at his frantic impudence.  At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found
at the feet.  We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper, from one to the
aware of that, said elijah, slowly and wonderingly looking from me to
benevolent countenance
but once more he came softly after us; and touching my shoulder again, said,
country way; won't hurt him face.  Face!  said I, call that his face?  very
cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.  Never
downwards and inclosed in his folded arms.  The profoundest slumber slept
enough; and then, without more ado, sat quietly down there.  Gracious!
everything in profound quiet, not a soul moving.  The cabin entrance was
frost this morning, ain't it?  Good bye to ye.  Shan't see ye again very
had best sit up with the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly.
have thought myself to have been optically deceived in that matter, were it
he'll twitch you off soon.  I wonder he don't wake.  Queequeg removed himself
imperfect misty dawn, when we drew nigh the wharf.  There are some sailors
like men going towards that ship a while ago?  Struck by this plain
little, in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me.  It
locked within; the hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging.
matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying,
me to understand that, in his land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas
mind him, said I, Queequeg, come on.  But he stole up to us again, and
not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable question.  But I beat the thing down;
oblige my friend and me by withdrawing.  We are going to the Indian and Pacific
of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally, were in the
other.  Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave
running ahead there, if I see right, said I to Queequeg, it can't be
said I, looking dubiously at the sleeper.  But it seemed that, when on the
said Queequeg, shaking himself, go 'way!  Aint going aboard, then?  Yes,
shadows; she's off by sunrise, I guess; come on!  Avast!  cried a voice,
shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us, stood stooping forward a
soon, I guess; unless it's before the Grand Jury.  And with these cracked
suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder, said -- Did ye see anything looking
tattered pea-jacket.  He was thrown at whole length upon two chests, his face
then; but how hard he breathes, he's heaving himself; get off, Queequeg,
to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and lighted his tomahawk pipe.  I sat
to ye!  he rejoined, again moving off.  Oh!  I was going to warn ye against
upon him.  Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?
was Elijah.  Going aboard?  Hands off, will you, said I. Lookee here,
we are, said I, but what business is that of yours?  Do you know, Mr.
wharf, Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I would
whose owner at the same time coming close behind us, laid a hand upon both our
words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small wonderment
you are heavy, it's grinding the face of the poor.  Get off, Queequeg!  Look,

     Man the capstan!  Blood and thunder! --jump! --was the next command, and the
.. <p 102 >
.. <p 103 >
Bildad lingered long; paced the deck with anxious strides" ran down into the
Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in addition to his other offices, was
Canaan stood, While Jordan rolled between.  Never did those sweet words sound
Captain Bildad.  For loath to depart, yet; very loath to leave, for good, a
Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into night, we found
I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day.  At last the anchor
Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg
an offing, that the two pilots were needed no longer.  The stout sail-boat
and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the
at the apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my
be seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor,
beyond the swelling flood, Stand dressed in living green.  So to the Jews old
board the Pequod, particularly in getting under weigh; and Charity, his
both ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot.  I was
break thy backbone!  why don't ye spring, i say, all of ye--spring!  Quohog!
cabin to speak another farewell word there; again came on deck, and looked
comforting myself, however, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be
concerned in, for he never piloted any other craft --Bildad, I say, might now
crew sprang for the handspikes.  Now, in getting under weigh, the station
elephant, vast curving icicles depended from the bows.  Lank Bildad, as pilot,
found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay;
freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody.  Thinks
generally occupied by the pilot is the forward part of the ship.  And here
glistened in the moonlight; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge
good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him, --poor old
hands at the windlass, who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls
headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as the old craft deep dived into
howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were heard, -- Sweet fields
immediate vicinity.  That was my first kick.  Is that the way they heave in
in Booble Alley, with hearty good will.  Nevertheless, not three days
in ice, as in polished armor.  The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks
in which some thousands of his hard earned dollars were invested; a ship, in
jacket, there was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in
made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was
more starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loath to say
more sweetly to me than then.  They were full of hope and fruition.  Spite of
on my handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we
one of the licensed pilots of the port --he being suspected to have got himself
ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray cased us
previous, Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowed on
ripped and swore astern in the most frightful manner.  I almost thought he
ship bound on so long and perilous a voyage --beyond both stormy Capes; a ship
sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman's berth.
so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there using his leg very
spring, thou chap with the red whiskers; spring there, Scotchcap; spring,
store; and meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up by
strike the tent was well known to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor.
that had accompanied us began ranging alongside.  It was curious and not
the green seas, and sent the shivering frost all over her, and the winds
the marchant service?  he roared.  Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and
the spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.  At last we gained such
this frigid
thou green pants.  Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!  And
to windward; looked towards the wide and endless waters, only bounded by the
unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were affected at this juncture, especially
was up, the sails were set, and off we glided.  It was a short, cold
when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified
which an old shipmate sailed as captain; a man almost as old as he, once
winter night in the boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter
would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I paused






     As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked
     and
     dollars; and every year importing into our harbors a well reaped harvest of 00847,000,000 dollars.  How comes all this, if there be not something puissant in
     pay to her whalemen in bounties upwards of 1,000,000
     pounds?  And lastly, how comes it that we whalemen of America now outnumber
     to be regarded among landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable
.. < chapter xxiv 2  THE ADVOCATE >
.. <p 106 >
.. <p 107 >
And as for the matter of the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye shall
Whale Fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed
a battery, would quickly recoil at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast
all the rest of the banded whalemen in the world; sail a navy of upwards of
alone resides the highest truth, shoreless, indefinite as God --so, better is
among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth.  But even granting the charge
are, that is true.  But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest badge
burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory!  But look at this matter in
comparable to the unspeakable carrion of those battle-fields from which so
comprehensible terrors of man compared with the interlinked terrors and
cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for his life, point out one single peaceful
crawl to land!  Terrors of the terrible!  is all this agony so vain?  Take
deemed almost superfluous to establish the fact, that among people at large,
emulation of the naval officers he should append the initials S. W.  F. (Sperm
engaged therein, we are surrounded by all manner of defilements.  Butchers we
fleets?  Why did Louis XVI.  of France, at his own personal expense, fit out
for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn round the globe,
have been all Martial Commanders whom the world invariably delights to honor.
have been.  Why did the Dutch in DeWitt's time have admirals of their whaling
heart, take heart, O Bulkington!  Bear thee grimly, demigod!  Up from the spray
his merits, were he presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and if in
idea of peril so much enhances the popular conceit of the soldier's
in question to be true; what disordered slippery decks of a whale-ship are
in this business of whaling; and as this business of whaling has somehow come
influence, which within the last sixty years has operated more potentially
injustice hereby done to us hunters of whales.  In the first place, it may be
it to perish in that howling infinite, than be ingloriously dashed upon the
lee, even if that were safety!  For worm-like, then, oh!  who would craven
liberal professions.  If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous
many soldiers return to drink in all ladies' plaudits?  And if the
metropolitan society, it would but slightly advance the general opinion of
of families from our own island of Nantucket?  Why did Britain between the
of thy ocean-perishing --straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!
other lights; weigh it in all sorts of scales; see what we whalemen are, and
pre-eminently presuming and ridiculous.  Doubtless one leading reason why the
profession; let me assure ye that many a veteran who has freely marched up to
pursuit; therefore, I am all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the
seven hundred vessels; manned by eighteen thousand men; yearly consuming 00824,000,000 of dollars; the ships worth, at the time of sailing, 20,000,000
soon be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown, and
tail, fanning into eddies the air over his head.  For what are the
the business of whaling is not accounted on a level with what are called the
unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-abounding adoration!
vocation amounts to a butchering sort of business; and that when actively
whaling ships from Dunkirk, and politely invite to that town some score or two
whaling?  But this is not the half; look again.  I freely assert, that the
which, upon the whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-ship at least
wonders of God!  But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does it
world declines honoring us whalemen, is this: they think that, at best, our
years





     In behalf of the dignity of whaling, I
     The chief mate of the Pequod was
     Whaling not respectable?  Whaling is imperial!  By old English statutory
     a mature man who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that man has probably got
     his totality.  But the only thing to be considered here, is this --what kind
.. < chapter xxv 27  POSTSCRIPT >
.. < chapter xxvi 26  KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES >
.. <p 109n. >
.. <p 110 >
.. <p 110 >
.. <p 110n. >
.. <p 111 >
.. <p 111 >
.. <p 112 >
Oh, that's only nominal!  The whale himself has never figured in any grand
See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
Starbuck, a native of Nantucket, and a Quaker by descent.  He was a long,
a quoggy spot in him somewhere.  As a general rule, he can't amount to much in
account that man more honorable than that great captain of antiquity who
and there may be a caster of state.  How they use the salt, precisely --who
boasted of taking as many walled towns.  And, as for me, if, by any
coast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession.  Grant
coronation, even as a head of salad.  Can it be, though, that they anoint it
earnest man, and though born on an icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure
ever deserve any real repute in that small but high hushed world which I might
facts, an advocate who should wholly suppress a not unreasonable
fellow who anoints his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing.  In truth,
he not be blameworthy?  It is well known that at the coronation of kings and
heavens attest.  Cetus is a constellation in the South!  No more!  Drive down
hot latitudes, his flesh being hard as twice-baked biscuit.  Transported to
imposing way.  The whale never figured in any grand imposing way?  In
in my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all the honor and the glory to
it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no real dignity in
know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fifty whales.  I
knows?  Certain I am, however, that a king's head is solemnly oiled at his
law, the whale is declared a royal fish.
might be ruminated here, concerning the essential dignity of this regal
my death, my executors, or more properly my creditors, find any precious MSS.
not be unreasonably ambitious of; if hereafter I shall do anything that,
of oil is used at coronations?  Certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor macassar
oil, nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil.  What
one of the mighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the
possibility, there be any as yet undiscovered prime thing in me; if I shall
process, because in common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a
queens, even modern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for
state, the sweetest of all oils?  Think of that, ye loyal Britons!  we
surmise, which might tell eloquently upon his cause --such an advocate, would
the Indies, his live blood would not spoil like bottled
their functions is gone through.  There is a saltcellar of state, so called,
then can it possibly be, but sperm oil in its unmanufactured, unpolluted
upon the whole, a man might rather have done than to have left undone; if, at
whalemen supply your kings and queens with coronation stuff!
whaling.  No dignity in whaling?  The dignity of our calling the very
whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my Harvard.
with a view of making its interior run well, as they anoint machinery?  Much
world's capital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the Syrian
would fain advance naught but substantiated facts.  But after embattling his
your hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg!  No more!  I





     God!  who didst not refuse to the swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic
     Stubb was the second mate.  He
     When close to the whale, in the very death-lock of the fight, he handled his
     them tragic graces; if even the most mournful, perchance the most abased,
     they came with an indifferent air; and while engaged in the most imminent
.. < chapter xxvii 2  KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES >
.. <p 114 >
.. <p 115 >
.. <p 116 >
Cape-Cod-man.  A happy-go-lucky; neither craven nor valiant; taking perils as
He would hum over his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the most
Jackson from the pebbles; who didst hurl him upon a war-horse; who didst
abounding dignity which has no robed investiture.  Thou shalt see it shining
absolute!  The centre and circumference of all democracy!  His omnipresence,
all invited guests.  He was as particular about the comfortable arrangement of
among them all, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts; if I shall
august dignity I treat of, is not the dignity of kings and robes, but that
castaways, I shall hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark; weave round
character seem gone; bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle
completely stifle her upbraidings against the permitting stars.  But this
creature, that over any ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run
crisis of the chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journeyman joiner
death into an easy chair.  What he thought of death itself, there is no
doubt, like a good sailor, he took it to be a sort of call of the watch to
engaged for the year.  Good-humored, easy, and careless, he presided over his
exasperated monster.  Long usage had, for this Stubb, converted the jaws of
fools, and murderers there may be; men may have mean and meagre faces; but
good-humor of his; that thing must have been his pipe.  For, like his nose,
ground with their packs; what helped to bring about that almost impious
he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a comfortable dinner, no
his part of the boat, as an old stage-driver is about the snugness of his box.
his short, black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face.  You
in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike; that democratic dignity
man, in the ideal, is so noble and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing
mantle of humanity over all my kind!  Bear me out in it, thou great democratic
marchings, ever cullest Thy selectest champions from the kingly commons; bear
me out in it, O God!
me out in it, thou just spirit of equality, which hast spread one royal
nose as without his pipe.
of a valor-ruined man.  Nor can piety itself, at such a shameful sight,
our divine equality!  If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and
ourselves, so far within us, that it remains intact though all the outer
out when he obeyed the order, and not sooner.  What, perhaps, with other
pearl; Thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold, the
rainbow over his disastrous set of sun; then against all mortal critics bear
stock-companies and nations; knaves,
stumped and paupered arm of old Cervantes; Thou who didst pick up Andrew
telling.  Whether he ever thought of it at all, might be a question; but, if
things, made Stubb such an easygoing, unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off
thunder him higher than a throne!  Thou who, in all Thy mighty, earthly
to throw their costliest robes.  That immaculate manliness we feel within
touch that workman's arm with some ethereal light; if I shall spread a
tumble aloft, and bestir themselves there, about something which he would find
unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly, as a whistling tinker his hammer.
was a native of Cape Cod; and hence, according to local usage, was called a
whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner, and his crew
which, on all hands, radiates without end from God; Himself!  The great God
with the burden of life in a world full of grave peddlers, all bowed to the
would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk without his

     For several days after leaving Nantucket,
--which I felt, yet whenever I came to look about me in the ship, it seemed
.. < chapter xxviii 11  AHAB >
.. <p 118 >
.. <p 119 >
.. <p 119 >
Africa, Nantucket, and the pagan harbors most frequented by whalemen; and
Ahasuerus Daggoo, was the Squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-man
Anacharsis Clootz deputation from all the
But poorly could I withstand them, much as in other moods I was almost ready
Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London, put in at the Shetland
Islanders seem to make the best whalemen.  They were nearly all Islanders in
Islands, to receive the full complement of their crew.  Upon the passage
Railroads.  The same, I say, because in all these cases the native American
all his barbaric virtues, and erect as a giraffe, moved about the decks in
all the pomp of six feet five in his socks.  There was a corporeal humility
angels, and beat his tambourine in glory; called a coward here, hailed a
bay on his native coast.  And never having been anywhere in the world but in
before.  Poor Alabama boy!  On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shall ere
beside him.  As for the residue of the Pequod's company, be it said, that at
coal-black
come to beg truce of a fortress.  Curious to tell, this imperial negro,
continent of men, but each Isolato living on a separate continent of his
crews from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores.  In like manner, the
each other at the watches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary,
employed in the American whale fishery, are Americans born, though pretty
engineering forces employed in the construction of the American Canals and
fishery as with the American army and military and merchant navies, and the
from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, that after all it was
having now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in the ships of
heightened at times by the ragged Elijah's diabolical incoherences uninvitedly
hero there!
his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sailors called them
homewards, they drop them there again.  How it is, there is no telling, but
in looking up at him; and a white man standing before him seemed a white flag
isles of the sea, and all the ends of the earth, accompanying Old Ahab in the
liberally provides the brains, the rest of the world as generously supplying
long see him, beating his tambourine; prelusive of the eternal time, when
nearly all the officers are.  Herein it is the same with the American whale
negro-savage, with a lion-like tread --an Ahasuerus to behold.  Suspended from
nothing above hatches was seen of Captain Ahab.  The mates regularly relieved
of them ever come back.  Black Little Pip --he never did --oh, no!  he went
own.  Yet now, federated along one keel, what a set these Isolatoes were!  An
owners uncommonly heedful of what manner of men they shipped; daggoo retained
pequod to lay the world's grievances before that bar from which not very many
plain they but commanded vicariously.  Yes, their supreme lord and dictator
recurring to me, with a subtle energy I could not have before conceived of.
ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the top-sail halyards to them.  In his
sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bid strike in with
the Pequod, Isolatoes too, I call such, not acknowledging the common
the muscles.  No small number of these whaling seamen belong to the Azores,
the now sacred retreat of the cabin.  Every time I ascended to the deck from my
the present day not one in two of the many thousand men before the mast
the seclusion of the sea, became almost a perturbation.  This was strangely
the second mate's squire.  Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic,
they seemed to be the only commanders of the ship; only they sometimes issued
to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that outlandish prophet of the
visible; for my first vague disquietude touching the unknown captain, now in
was there, though hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrate into
watches below, I instantly gazed aft to mark if any strange face were
wharves.  But whatever it was of apprehensiveness or uneasiness --to call it so
where the outward bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch to augment their
youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely


     Some days elapsed, and ice
--he would mutter to himself, -- for an old captain like me to be descending
.. < chapter xxix 2  ENTER AHAB; TO HIM, STUBB >
.. <p 122 >
.. <p 123 >
.. <p 124 >
And all these subtle agencies, more and more they wrought on Ahab's texture.
April and May, trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even the barest,
It was so with Ahab; only that now, of late, he seemed so much to live in
Old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life, the less man
Pequod was only making a passage now; not regularly cruising; nearly all
a word he spoke; nor did his officers say aught to him; though by all their
and icebergs all astern, the Pequod now went rolling through the bright Quito
became still less and less a recluse; as if, when the ship had sailed from
but with some cautiousness dropt it to its place, for fear of disturbing
deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band below; and when if a rope was to be
deck.  As the sky grew less gloomy; indeed, began to grow a little genial, he
did he put forth the faint blossom of a look, which, in any other man, would
eternal August of the Tropic.  The warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed,
face; in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some mighty woe.  Ere
firmest fortitude, a determinate unsurrenderable
from, the cabin to the planks.  It feels like going down into one's tomb,
greybeards will oftenest leave their berths to visit the night-cloaked deck.
has to do with aught that looks like death.  among sea-commanders, the old
hauled upon the forecastle, the sailors flung it not rudely down, as by day,
have soon flowered out in a smile.
heaped up --flaked up, with rose-water snow.  The starred and stately nights
home, nothing but the dead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him so
last sunny deck, he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast.  But the
layer were piled upon his brow, as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks
little respond to the playful allurings of that girlish air.  More than once
long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin.  But after
memory of their absent conquering Earls, the golden helmeted suns!  For
memory shot her crystals as the clear ice most forms of noiseless twilights.
merely lend new spells and potencies to the outward world.  Inward they turned
minutest gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, if not
now; and thus chase away, for that one interval, the clouds that layer upon
overflowing, redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet,
painful, consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye.  And not only
persuasiveness of the pleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually
pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had; or heavily walking the
ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send forth some few green
secluded.  And, by and by, it came to pass, that he was almost continually in
seducing nights.  But all the witcheries of that unwaning weather did not
seemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely pride, the
sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between such winsome days and such
so that there was little or nothing, out of himself, to employ or excite Ahab,
spring, which, at sea, almost perpetually reigns on the threshold of the
sprouts, to welcome such glad-hearted visitants; so Ahab did, in the end, a
straight out beyond the ship's ever-pitching prow.  There was an infinity of
that morning, he was every day visible to the crew; either standing in his
that, but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with a crucifixion in his
the air; but, as yet, for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at
the open air, that truly speaking, his visits were more to the cabin, than
their slumbering shipmates; when this sort of steady quietude would begin to
this narrow scuttle, to go to my grave-dug berth.  So, almost every
to charm him from his mood.  For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls,
to pile themselves upon.  Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling
twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night were set, and the band on
upon the soul, especially when the still mild hours of eve came on; then,
whaling preparatives needing supervision the mates were fully competent to,
wilfulness, in the fixed and fearless, forward dedication of that glance.  Not



     But this insult is whittled down to a point only."  But now comes the
     Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.  Such a
     When Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a
--How?  how?  how? --but the only way's
.. < chapter xxx 4  THE PIPE >
.. < chapter xxxi 2  QUEEN MAB >
.. <p 126 >
.. <p 126 >
.. <p 127 >
.. <p 128 >
Ahab lurchingly paced the planks.
Ahab.  Some moments passed, during which the thick vapor came from his mouth
I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried to kick back, upon my soul,
Khan of the plank, and a king of the sea, and a great lord of Leviathans was
and also his pipe.  lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the
between a living thump and a dead thump.  That's what makes a blow from the
cane.  Yes," thinks I,"it was only a playful cudgelling --in fact, only a
cursed pyramid -- so confoundedly contradictory was it all, all the while, I
fullest of trouble.  What business have I with this pipe?  This thing that is
greatest joke of the dream, Flask.  While I was battering away at the
hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane.  The
have I been unconsciously toiling, not pleasuring, --aye, and ignorantly
he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, this smoking no longer
his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed he had for a
in quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face.  How now,
instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipe made.  With slouched hat,
kick?"  By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned round
late, calling a sailor of the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool,
living member --that makes the living insult, my little man.  And thinks I to
man, but I was frightened.  Such a phiz!  But, somehow, next moment I was over
me by the shoulders, and slews me round.  "What are you 'bout?" says he.  Slid!
me?  I don't stand right on my legs.  Coming afoul of that old man has a sort
meant for sereneness, to send up mild white vapors among mild white hairs,
more curious, Flask--you know how curious all dreams are-- through all this rage
my little man, I kicked my leg right off!  And then, presto!  Ahab seemed a
myself all the while, mind, while I was stubbing my silly toes against that
not among torn iron-grey locks like mine.  I'll smoke no more-- He tossed the
of the tusks of the narwhale.  How could one look at Ahab then, seated on that
of turned me wrong side out.  By the Lord, I must have been dreaming, though
once; why, the end of it --the foot part --what a small sort of end it is;
pyramid, a sort of badger-haired old merman, with a hump on his back, takes
pyramid, and I, like a blazing fool, kept kicking at it.  But what was still
queer dream, King-Post, I never had.  You know the old man's ivory leg, well
row?  It's not a real leg, only a false leg."  And there's a mighty difference
say, I was thinking to myself, "what's his leg now, but a cane --a whalebone
smoking to windward all the while; to windward, and with such nervous
soothes.  Oh, my pipe!  hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone!  Here
still lighted pipe into the sea.  The fire hissed in the waves; the same
stool on the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.  In old Norse times,
that I was in, I somehow seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all, it
the fright.  "What am I about?" says I at last.  "And what business is that of
the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were fabricated, saith tradition,
this plaguey juggling thinks over by day-light.
to stash it; so here goes to hammock again; and in the morning, I'll see how
tripod of bones, without bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized?  For a
was not much of an insult, that kick from ahab.  "Why," thinks I,"what's the
whaleboning that he gave me --not a base kick.  Besides," thinks I,"look at it
whereas, if a broad footed farmer kicked me, there's a devilish broad insult.
whiffs, as if, like the dying whale, my final jets were the strongest and
while leaning over the bulwarks; and then, as had been usual with him of
yours, I should like to know, Mr. Humpback?  Do you want a


     I am the architect, not the builder.  But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary
     who have at large or in little, written of the whale.  Run over a few: --The
,
, Linnaeus declares, I hereby separate the whales
.. <p 131 >
Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and the Rev.  T. Cheever.  But to what
Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Thomas Browne;
Brisson; Marten; Lacepede; Bonneterre; Desmarest; Baron Cuvier; Frederick
Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale; Bennett; J. Ross Browne; the
Gesner; Ray; Linnaeus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green; Artedi; Sibbald;
Greenland whale is deposed, --the great sperm whale now reigneth!  There are
I hereupon offer my own poor endeavors.  I promise nothing complete; because
Owen ever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professional
Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great poets of past
System of Nature, A. D.
What am I that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan!  The awful
a plenty; and so in some small degree, with cetology, or the science of
all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten life.  Now the various species of
any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that very reason infallibly
attempt.  Those books are Beale's and Bennett's; both in their time surgeons
be faulty.  I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical description of the
before you, and at the same time, in the remotest degree succeed in the
bottom of the sea after them; to have one's hands among the unspeakable
by any means the largest of the whales.  Yet, owing to the long priority of
days, will satisfy you that the Greenland whale, without one rival, was to
foundations, ribs, and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing.
from the fish.  But of my own knowledge, I know that down to the year
harpooneer and whaleman.  I mean Captain Scoresby.  On the separate subject of
his claims, and the profound ignorance which, till some seventy years back,
ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few scientific
invested the then fabulous and utterly unknown sperm-whale, and which
knew nothing and says nothing of the great sperm whale, compared with which
letter-sorter in the Post-office is equal to it.  To grope down into the
libraries and sailed through oceans; I have had to do with whales with these
necessarily small; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality,
object here is simply to project the draught of a systematization of cetology.
only two books in being which at all pretend to put the living sperm whale
original matter touching the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is
outline one for the present, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by
preliminaries to settle.  first: the uncertain, unsettled condition of this
proclamation.  This is Charing Cross; hear ye!  good people all, --the
retreats and whale-ports; this usurpation has been every way complete.
science of Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in
sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against Linnaeus's express edict, were
some quarters it still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish.  In his
still found dividing the possession of the same seas with the Leviathan.  The
subsequent laborers.  As no better man advances to take this matter in hand,
tauntings in Job might well appal me.  Will he (the leviathan) make a covenant
the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existing authority.  But Scoresby
the Greenland whale is almost unworthy mentioning.  And here be it said, that
the Greenland whale is an usurper upon the throne of the seas.  He is not even
them the monarch of the seas.  But the time has at last come for a new
though mostly confined to scientific description.  As yet, however, the sperm
to English South-Sea whale-ships, and both exact and reliable men.  The
ultimate generalizing purpose all these have written, the above cited extracts
various species, or-- in this place at least --to much of any description.  My
visible hands; I am in earnest; and I will try.  There are some
whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any literature.  Far above
whales need some sort of popular comprehensive classification, if only an easy
whales.  many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen,
will show.  Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following
with thee?  Behold the hope of him is vain!  But I have swam through


     Of these so called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be several
     whale oil, an inferior article in commerce.  Among the fishermen, he is
( Right Whale).--In one respect this is the most venerable of the
--Under this head I reckon a monster which, by the various names of
.. <p 134 >
.. <p 135 >
Coast, and various other parts of the world, designated by them Right Whale
Cruising Grounds.  Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland
Fin-Back, Tall-Spout, and Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is
Greenland Whale; the Black Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the Right
Ordinaire of the French whalemen; the Growlands Walfish of the Swedes.  It is
agree in all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented a single
and English in the Arctic seas; it is the whale which the American fishermen
article commonly known as whalebone or baleen; and the oil specially known as
be visible, this isolated fin will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from
beaked whales; pike-headed whales; bunched whales; under-jawed whales and
bearing for his mark that style upon his back.  From having the baleen in his
color, approaching to olive.  His great lips present a cable-like aspect,
commonly the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers
conspicuous object.  this fin is some three or four feet long, growing
course of time, the true nature of spermaceti became
crossing the Atlantic, in the New York
departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate.  The right
determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction.  It is by endless
distinguishing feature, the fin, from which he derives his name, is often a
elucidating the sperm whale.  BOOK I. ( Folio), CHAPTER III. ( Fin-Back).
enhance its value by a notion so strangely significant of its scarcity.  And
formed by the intertwisting, slanting folds of large wrinkles.  His grand
graved on it.  On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes back.  The Fin-Back is
have long pursued in the Indian ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor' West
indiscriminately designated by all the following titles: The Whale; the
known, its original name was still retained by the dealers; no doubt to
leviathans, being the one first regularly hunted by man.  It yields the
like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain; gifted with such
man; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race,
mouth, the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale, among a
naturalists; the Greenland Whale of the English Whalemen; the Baliene
not gregarious.  He seems a whale-hater, as some men are man-haters.  Very
packet-tracks.  In the length he attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back
remotest and most sullen waters; his straight and single lofty jet rising
resembles the right whale, but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter
rostrated whales, are the fishermen's names for a few sorts.  In connexion
shy; always going solitary; unexpectedly rising to the surface in the
so the appellation must at last have come to be bestowed upon the whale from
spherical ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon
subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences, that some
surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavy hour-lines
the second species of my Folios?  It is the Great Mysticetus of the English
the surface.  When the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with
the whale which for more than two centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch
the wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery circle
theoretic species denominated Whalebone whales, that is, whales with baleen.
thus multitudinously baptized.  What then is the whale, which I include in
varieties, most of which, however, are little known.  Broad-nosed whales and
vertically from the hinder part of the back, of an angular shape, and with a
very sharp pointed end.  Even if not the slightest other part of the creature
whale of the English and the right whale of the Americans.  But they precisely
whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length, with reference to
whale.  there is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species
which this spermaceti was really derived.  BOOK I. ( Folio), CHAPTER II.
with this appellative of Whalebone whales , it is of great importance to
wondrous power and velocity in swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from
( Octavo), CHAPTER II. ( Black Fish). --I give the popular fishermen's names
--Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I suppose from his
--however that may be --it would certainly be very convenient to him for a
.. <p 138 >
.. <p 139 >
BOOK II. ( Octavo), CHAPTER III. ( Narwhale), that is, Nostril whale.
But you cannot prove either of these surmises to be correct.  My own opinion
Coffin said it was used for an ice-piercer; for the Narwhale, rising to the
Feegee fish.  He sometimes takes the great Folio whales by the lip, and hangs
Martin Frobisher on his return from that voyage, when Queen Bess did
almost all whales.  So, call him the Hyena Whale, if you please.  His voracity
and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so breaks through.
are curved upwards, he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on his
burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax.  Though their blubber is very
but a lengthened tusk, growing out from the jaw in a line a little depressed
circumpolar seas.  BOOK II. ( Octavo), CHAPTER IV. ( Killer). --Of this whale
considerable
distilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies, the same way that the
employs it for a rake in turning over the bottom of the sea for food.  Charley
example of the Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of animated
exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet.  Strictly speaking, this horn is
face.  This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length.  He is
folder in reading pamphlets.  The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked
for all these fish, for generally they are the best.  Where any name happens
found in almost all latitudes.  He has a peculiar way of showing his dorsal
from the horizontal.  But it is only found on the sinister side, which has an
frugal housekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite alone by themselves,
gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of Greenwich Palace, as
his bold ship sailed down the Thames; when Sir Martin returned from that
hooked fin in swimming, which looks something like a Roman nose.  When not
horns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn.  Originally it was in
ill effect, giving its owner something analogous to the aspect of a clumsy
in quantity, and pretty good for light.  By some fishermen his approach is
is little of it, and he is seldom hunted.  He is mostly found in the
is well known, and from the circumstance that the inner angles of his lips
is, that however this one-sided horn may really be used by the Narwhale
itself accounted an object of great curiosity.  Black Letter tells me that Sir
left-handed man.  What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it
leopard-like look, being of a milk-white ground color, dotted with round and
little is precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to the
more profitably employed, the sperm whale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena
nature.  From certain cloistered old authors I have gathered that this same
now, touching the Black Fish, so called, because blackness is the rule among
oblong spots of black.  His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there
on bended knees, did likewise present to her highness another horn, pertaining
peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose.  The creature is
poison, and as such, preparations of it brought immense prices.  It was also
prodigious long horn of the Narwhale, which for a long period after hung in
professed naturalist.  From what I have seen of him at a distance, I should
regarded as premonitory of the advance of the great sperm whale.  BOOK II.
say that he was about the bigness of a grampus.  He is very savage --a sort of
sea-unicorn's horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote against
some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages five feet, though some
surface of the Polar Sea,
sword-fish and bill-fish; though some sailors tell me that the Narwhale
the castle at Windsor.  An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester,
thin, some of these whales will yield you upwards of thirty gallons of oil.
to a land beast of the unicorn nature.  The Narwhale has a very picturesque,
to be vague or inexpressive, I shall say so, and suggest another.  I do so
voyage, saith Black Letter, on bended knees he presented to her highness a
waist.  He swims in herds; he is never regularly hunted, though his oil is
whale, the Horned whale, and the Unicorn whale.  He is certainly a curious
whale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic employment --as some
would be hard to say.  It does not seemed to be used like the blade of the



     Concerning the officers of the
     copestone to posterity.  God keep me from ever completing anything.  This
     hay, and especially as they do not spout, I deny their credentials as
.. < chapter xxxiii 24  THE SPECKSYNDER >
.. <p 132n. >
.. <p 137n. >
.. <p 142 >
.. <p 142 >
.. <p 143 >
Cetology.
Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) are included by
Fat-Cutter; usage, however, in time made it equivalent to Chief Harpooneer.
I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatins and
In those days, the captain's authority was restricted to the navigation and
Strength, Cash, and Patience!
Whale; the Cape Whale; the Leading Whale; the Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale;
Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain.  Because,
abridged.  At present he ranks simply as senior Harpooneer; and as such, is
and all its concerns, the Specksynder or Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme.  In
and more ago, the command of a whale ship was
be finished by their first architects; grand ones, true ones, ever leave the
between him and an officer called the Specksynder.  Literally this word means
but one of the captain's more inferior subalterns.  Nevertheless, as upon the
contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers, and feeding on wet
depends, and since in the American Fishery he is not only an important
evinced by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two centuries
future investigators, who may complete what I have here but begun.  If any of
general management of the vessel: while over the whale-hunting department
good conduct of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely
hardly help suspecting them for mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but
have kept my word.  But I now leave my cetological System standing thus
incorporated into this System, according to his Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo
magnitude: --The Bottle-Nose Whale; the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed
manner of uncouth names.  But I omit them as altogether obsolete; and can
many naturalists among the whales.  But as these pig-fish are a nosy,
not wholly lodged in the person now called the captain, but was divided
of officers, a class unknown of course in any other marine than the
of uncertain, fugitive, half-fabulous whales, which, as an American
officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances (night watches on a
order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to them in figure, yet
peculiarity on ship-board, arising from the existence of the harpooneer class
shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo volume does.
signifying nothing.  Finally: It was stated at the outset, that this system
still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower.  For small erections may
the Blue Whale; etc.  From Icelandic, Dutch, and old English authorities,
the British Greenland Fishery, under the corrupted title of Specksioneer,
the Coppered Whale; the Elephant Whale; the Iceberg Whale; the Quog Whale;
the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its diminished form does not preserve the
the following
their forecastle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable to
there might be quoted other lists of uncertain whales, blessed with all
this old Dutch official is still retained, but his former dignity is sadly
unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with the crane
whale-craft, this seems as good a place as any to set down a little domestic
whale-fleet.  The large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is
whaleman, I know by reputation, but not personally.  I shall enumerate them by
whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked, then he can readily be
whales; and have presented them with their passports to quit the kingdom of
while the whales of this order, though smaller than those of the former
whole book is but a draught --nay, but the draught of a draught.  Oh Time,
would not be here, and at once, perfected.  You cannot but plainly see that I



     But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a new face
     Dinner, Mr. Starbuck, disappears into the cabin.  When the last echo of his
     It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the
.. <p 146 >
.. <p 147 >
Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate towards him, the mate received his
Babylon; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but courteously,
Belshazzar's, for Belshazzar was not the greatest.  Who has but once dined
Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned sea-lion on the
a rapid Dinner, Mr. Flask, follows after his predecessors.  But the third
altogether, and, then, independent, hilarious little Flask enters King Ahab's
among the strange things bred by the intense artificialness of sea-usages,
and swallowed it, not without circumspection.  For, like the Coronation
announces dinner to his lord and master; who, sitting in the lee
awhile, and then slightly shaking the main brace, to see whether it be all
bear themselves boldly and defyingly enough towards their commander; yet,
but noiseless squall of a hornpipe right over the Grand Turk's head; and
children before Ahab; and yet, in Ahab, there seemed not to lurk the smallest
complete inattention to the tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had not
czarship which there is no withstanding.  Now, if to this consideration you
difference?  A problem?  Perhaps not.  To have been Belshazzar, King of
dinner in that same commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not
dinner-table of invited guests, that man's unchallenged power and dominion of
emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck, seems to feel
few turns along the planks, and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says,
for the world they would have profaned that moment with the slightest
heard his menial.  But presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he
his friends, has tasted what it is to be Caesar.  It is a witchery of social
his own proper turn, each officer waited to be served.  They were as little
in all sorts of directions, and kicking off his shoes, he strikes into a sharp
in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides over his own private
individual influence for the time; that man's royalty of state transcends
man's knife, as he carved the chief dish before him.  I do not suppose that
meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly; and a little started if,
mutely reckoning the latitude on the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet,
observation, even upon so neutral a topic as the weather.  No!  And when
perchance, the knife grazed against the plate; and chewed it noiselessly;
presence, in the character of Abjectus, or the Slave.  It is not the least
quarter-boat, has just been taking an observation of the sun; and is now
reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked,
relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping all sorts of knowing winks
reserved for that daily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg.  From his
right with that important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with
scuttle.  The second Emir lounges about the rigging
shelf, he goes down rollicking, so far at least as he remains visible from
social arrogance.  With one mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old
steward, thrusting his pale loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle,
sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck, the first Emir, has every reason to
superadd the official supremacy of a ship-master, then, by inference, you
suppose that he is seated, then Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a
swings himself to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying,
table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical.  Wherefore this
ten to one, let those very officers the next moment go down to their customary
that while in the open air of the deck some officers will, upon provocation,
the deck, reversing all other processions, by bringing up the rear with music.
then, by a dexterous sleight, pitching his cap up into the mizentop for a
therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur.  But he who
to say deprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the head of the
white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike but still deferential cubs.  In
will derive the cause of that peculiarity of sea-life just mentioned.
with some touch of pleasantness, Dinner, Mr. Stubb, and descends the

     It was during the more pleasant weather,
.. < chapter xxxv 2  THE MAST-HEAD >
.. <p 150 >
.. <p 151 >
Commonly, after seeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they
Daggoo seated on the floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed
Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth lurked in his own
He lived in the world, as the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled
In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale captains,
Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have been guilty of some
Missouri.  And as when Spring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan of the
Tashtego, opposing his filed teeth to the Indian's: crosswise to them,
a permanent thing, residing in the open air.  Nor did they lose much hereby;
adjoining, and fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door,
after a three, four, or five years' voyage she is drawing nigh home with
and superb a person.  But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank
any time, permitted there.  So that, in real truth, the mates and harpooneers
anything empty in her --say, an empty vial even --then, her mast-heads are kept
at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy.  How could he forget that in his
belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy alone that anybody else is, at
but a buckler.  in good time, though, to his great delight, the three
deep of the abounding element of air; and through his dilated nostrils
demanded, he would escape from their clutches into his little pantry
ears, all their martial bones jingling in them at every step, like Moorish
for their lances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner,
giants made or nourished.  But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of
gloom!
head to the low carlines; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making the
himself,
house; turning inwards for a moment, only to be turned out the next; and, as
in it.  For when they did enter it, it was something as a street-door enters a
in the cabin was no companionship; socially, Ahab was inaccessible.  Though
lean arms.  And when he would hear Tashtego singing out for him to produce
low cabin framework to shake, as when an African elephant goes passenger in a
miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her proper cruising ground.  and if,
most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost simultaneously with
mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so broad, baronial,
murderous, convivial indiscretions.  Alas!  Dough-Boy!  hard fares the white
nominally included in the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it.
nominally lived there; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits,
of the Pequod might more properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than
palsy.  Nor did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets,
salt-sea warriors would rise and depart; to his credulous, fable-mongering
say dainty.  It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively small
scimetars in scabbards.  But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and
ship.  But for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious, not to
shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the sullen paws of its
sleeping-time, when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters.
snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds.  Not by beef or by bread, are
sucking his own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's soul,
that his bones might be picked, the simple-witted Steward all but shattered
that in due rotation with the other seamen my first mast-head came round.  In
the black terrific Ahab, and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these
the crockery hanging round him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the
the lip in eating --an ugly sound enough --so much so, that the trembling
the vessel's leaving her port; even though she may have fifteen thousand
they were scarcely ever in it except at meal-times, and just before
they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did not
three savages, Dough-Boy's whole life was one continual lip-quiver.
till all was over.  It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against
waiter who waits upon cannibals.  Not a napkin should he carry on his arm,
who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rights the ship's cabin
woods, burying himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there,
.. <p 154 >
.. <p 155 >
Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, and incidentally
a very different thing.  Now, it was plainly a labor of love for Captain Sleet
after ourselves any other apparatus we may beget.  In shape, the Sleet's
as cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns.  To be sure, in cold weather
as it is a mere envelope, or additional skin encasing you.  You cannot put a
ascend into it through a little trap-hatch in the bottom.  On the after side,
being the original inventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate
charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently invented crow's-nest
considerable a portion of the whole term of your natural life, should be so
conveniences.  When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head in this crow's
convenient closet of your watch-coat.  Concerning all this, it is much to be
crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a watch-coat is not so much of a house
crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe; it is open above,
crow's-nest; but though he so enlarges upon many of these, and though he
deplored that the mast-heads of a southern whale ship are unprovided with
everything resolves you into languor.  For the most part, in this tropic
for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of Old Greenland; in
gallant cross-trees.  Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels about
hammock, a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those
holding that if we call our own children after our own names (we fathers
however, where it is furnished with a movable side-screen to keep to windward
in which to keep your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nautical
into unnecessary excitements; you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankrupt
inventor and patentee, and free from all ridiculous false delicacy, and
it the Sleet's crow's-nest, in honor of himself; he being the original
lookouts of a Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of
months.  And it is much to be deplored that the place to which you devote so
most usual point of perch is the head of the t' gallant-mast, where you stand
nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with him (also fixed in
no gazettes; extras with startling accounts of commonplaces never delude you
of its fleshly tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, nor even move
of the Glacier, which was the name of Captain Sleet's good craft.  He called
of your head in a hard gale.  Being fixed on the summit of the mast, you
off the stray narwhales, or vagrant sea unicorns infesting those waters; for
or side next the stern of the ship, is a comfortable seat, with a locker
out of it, without running great risk of perishing (like an ignorant pilgrim
properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more of a house than the
sadly destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, or adapted
securities; fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought of what you
shall have for dinner --for all your meals for three years and more are snugly
shelf or chest of drawers in your body, and no more can you make a
small and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves.  Your
stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, with nothing ruffled but the
stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is immutable.  In one of those southern
the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to shoot down upon them is
the frozen seas.  In the fire-side narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled A
the rack), together with a powder flask and shot, for the purpose of popping
the various hours you spend at the mast-head would amount to several entire
this admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads are furnished with a
those enviable little tents or pulpits, called crow's-nests, in which the
to breed a comfortable localness of feeling, such as pertains to a bed, a
to describe, as he does, all the little detailed conveniences of his
treats us to a very scientific account of his experiments in this crow's-nest,
unclad body; for as the soul is glued inside
underneath for umbrellas, comforters, and coats.  In front is a leather rack,
upon two thin parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t'
waves.  The tranced ship indolently rolls; the drowsy trade winds blow;
whalemen, on a long three or four years' voyage, as often happens, the sum of
whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness invests you; you hear no news; read
with a small compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the
you cannot successfully shoot at them from
you may carry your house aloft with you, in the shape of a watch-coat; but







     ( enter Ahab: Then, all.) It
     And what do ye next, men?  Lower away, and after him!  And what tune is
     Good!  cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing the hearty
     Suddenly he came to a halt by the bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into
     could almost see that thought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he
     the chick that's in him pecks the shell.  T'will soon be out.  The hours
     to send everybody aft.  Sir!  said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or
.. < chapter xxxvi 21  THE QUARTER-DECK >
.. <p 157 >
.. <p 158 >
.. <p 159 >
a whale, men?  Sing out for him!  was the impulsive rejoinder from a score
aft, repeated Ahab.  Mast-heads, there!  come down!  When the entire ship's
after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended the cabin-gangway to the
among the men; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask, that Ahab must have
and dented brow; there also, you would see still stranger foot-prints --the
and fiercely glad and approving, grew the countenance of the old man at every
animation into which his unexpected question had so magnetically thrown them.
at all; and your identity comes back in horror.  Over Descartian vortices you
coming up, Ahab, after rapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting
company were assembled, and with curious and not wholly unapprehensive faces,
deck.  There most sea-captains usually walk at that hour, as country
did not last long.  Vehemently pausing, he cried: -- What do ye do when ye see
except that rocking life imparted by a gently rolling ship; by her, borrowed
foot-prints of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.  But on the occasion in
from the sea; by the sea, from the inscrutable tides of God.  But while this
gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns in the garden.  Soon his
geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk.  Did you fixedly gaze,
half-slouched hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the wondering whispering
half-throttled shriek you drop through that transparent air into the summer
his eyes among the crew, started from his standpoint; and as though not a
hover.  And perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one
inward mould of every outer movement.  D'ye mark him, Flask?  whispered Stubb;
it ye pull to, men?  A dead whale or a stove boat!  More and more strangely
left a deeper mark.  And, so full of his thought was Ahab, that at every
marvelling how it was that they themselves became so excited at such
never given on ship-board except in some extraordinary case.  Send everybody
now half-revolving in his pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud,
of clubbed voices.
paced; so completely possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the
part of every shore the round globe over.  There is no life in thee, now,
planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all over dented, like
question, those dents looked deeper, even as his nervous step that morning
same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect.  It drew near the close of day.
sea, no more to rise for ever.  Heed it well, ye Pantheists!
seemingly purposeless questions.  But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab,
shout; while the mariners began to gaze curiously at each other, as if
sleep, this dream is on ye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold
soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck.  With bent head and
steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his old rounds, upon
summoned them there for the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat.  But this
the auger-hole there, and with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck
too, upon that ribbed
uniform turn that he made, now at the main-mast and now at the binnacle, you
was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that one morning shortly
were eyeing him, for he looked not unlike the weather horizon when a storm is
wore on; --Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pacing the deck, with the




     Vengeance on a dumb brute!  cried Starbuck, that simply smote thee from
     requirest a little lower layer.  If money's to be the measurer, man, and the
     that my vengeance will fetch a great premium here!  He smites his chest,
     when every foremast-hand has clutched a whetstone?  Ah!  constrainings seize
.. <p 162 >
.. <p 163 >
For with little external to constrain us, the innermost necessities in our
Let it go.  Look!  see yonder Turkish cheeks of spotted tawn -- living,
Nantucket market.  Nantucket market!  Hoot!  But come closer, Starbuck; thou
Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, he ordered
Starbuck, lowly.  But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the
That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate; and be the white whale agent,
a fin; no wondrous feat for Starbuck.  What is it more?  From this one poor
accountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, by girdling
act, the undoubted deed --there, some unknown but still reasoning thing puts
away; the winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heaved and rolled as
before.  Ah, ye admonitions and warnings!  why stay ye not when ye come?  But
being, these still drive us on.  The measure!  the measure!  cried Ahab.
blindest instinct!  Madness!  To be enraged with a dumb thing, Captain Ahab,
breathing pictures painted by the sun.  The Pagan leopards --the unrecking and
commander's vengeance.  How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even
eyes lighted up with the stubbornness of life; the subterranean laugh died
forth the mouldings of its features from behind the unreasoning mask.  If man
from the hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of
hunt, then, the best lance out of all Nantucket, surely he will not hang back,
if thou gettest it, Captain Ahab?  it will not fetch thee much in our
in the way of the business we follow; but I came here to hunt whales, not my
in this matter of the whale?  See Stubb!  he laughs!  See yonder Chilian!  he
is even that fair play.  Who's over me?  Truth hath no confines.  Take off
it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then, let me tell thee,
life they feel!  The crew, man, the crew!  Are they not one and all with Ahab,
look ye, Starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself.  There are
masts, as for a moment their hearts sank in.  For again Starbuck's downcast
mate, Ahab did not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh
men from whom warm words are small indignity.  I meant not to incense thee.
nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs.  Starbuck now is mine; cannot
objects, man, are but as pasteboard masks.  But in each event --in the living
oppose me now, without rebellion.  God keep me! --keep us all!  murmured
or be the white whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon him.  Talk not
play herein, jealousy presiding over all creations.  But not my master, man,
predictions from without, as verifications of the foregoing things within.
rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows!  Yet not so much
sapling cannot, Starbuck!  And what is it?  Reckon it. 'Tis but to help strike
see in him outrageous strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it.
seems blasphemous.  Hark ye yet again, --the little lower layer.  All visible
silence, then, that voices thee. ( aside) something shot from my dilated
snorts to think of it.  Stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one tost
so; thou reddenest and palest; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow.  But
sun do that, then could I do the other; since there is ever a sort of fair
the mask!  How can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the
the winds in the cordage; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the
thee; I see!  the billow lifts thee!  Speak, but speak! --Aye, aye!  thy
them to produce their weapons.  Then ranging them before him near the capstan,
thine eye!  more intolerable than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare!  So,
think there's naught beyond.  But 'tis enough.  He tasks me; he heaps me; I
to me of blasphemy, man; I'd strike the sun if it insulted me.  For could the
unworshipping things, that live; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid
wall?  To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me.  Sometimes I
whispered Stubb, what's that for?  methinks it rings most vast, but hollow.
will strike, strike through




     Ahab sitting alone, and gazing out.  I leave a white and turbid wake;
     By the Mainmast; Starbuck leaning
     The cabin; by the stern windows;
     against it.  My soul is more than matched; she's overmanned; and by a
     some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it.  Yet is there hope.  Time and
'Twas not so hard a task.  I thought to find one stubborn, at
--Take some one of your own size; don't pommel me!  No, ye've knocked me
--that I feel; the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against
.. < chapter xxxviii 26  DUSK >
.. <p 166 >
.. <p 166 >
.. <p 167 >
Burkes and blinded Bendigoes!  I will not say as school-boys do to bullies,
But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me!  I think I see
Good night --good night! ( waving his hand, he moves from the window.)
I must help him to it.  Will I, nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to
I've willed, I'll do!  They think me mad --Starbuck does; but I'm demoniac, I
Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, under
[ A burst of revelry from the forecastle.] Oh, God!  to sail with such a
am madness maddened!  That wild madness that's only calm to comprehend
damned, most subtly and most malignantly!  damned in the midst of Paradise!
down, and I am up again; but ye have run and hidden.  Come forth from behind
else ye swerve yourselves!  man has ye there.  Swerve me?  The path to my
enjoy.  Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoying power;
ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush like wine.  The gold brow
fixed purpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.
heathen crew that have small touch of human mothers in them!  Whelped
him; tows me with a cable I have no knife to cut.  Horrible old man!  Who's
his impious end; but feel that
i, the wearer, see not its far flashings; but darkly feel that i wear that,
itself!  The prophecy was that I should be dismembered; and--Aye!  I lost this
leg.  I now prophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer.  Now, then, be the
light, it lights not me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne'er
lords it over all below!  Oh!  I plainly see my miserable office, --to obey,
madman!  Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!
match itself must needs be wasting!  What I've dared, I've willed; and what
most brain-battering fight!  Dry heat upon my brow?  Oh!  time was, when as the
mounts up!  she wearies with her endless hill.  Is, then, the crown too heavy
over him, he cries; --aye, he would be a democrat to all above; look, how he
pale waters, paler cheeks, where'er I sail.  The envious billows sidelong
plumbs the blue.  The diver sun --slow dived from noon, --goes down; my soul
prophet and the fulfiller one.  That's more than ye, ye great gods, ever
rebelling; and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity!  For in his eyes I read
run down; my heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift again.
small gold-fish has its glassy globe.  His heaven-insulting purpose, God may
stand before me; and I their match.  Oh, hard!  that to fire others, the
sunrise nobly spurred me, so the sunset soothed.  No more.  This lovely
swell to whelm my track; let them; but first I pass.  Yonder, by the
that I wear?  this Iron Crown of Lombardy.  Yet is it bright with many a gem;
that dazzlingly confounds. 'Tis iron --that I know--not gold. 'Tis split, too
the least; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels, and
the solid metal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs no helmet in the
they revolve.  Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder, they all
tide flow wide.  The hated whale has the round watery world to swim in, as the
to the iron way!
to ye; come and see if ye can swerve me.  Swerve me?  ye cannot swerve me,
torrents' beds, unerringly I rush!  Naught's an obstacle, naught's an angle
wedge aside.  I would up heart, were it not like lead.  But my whole clock's
were.  I laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket-players, ye pugilists, ye deaf
your cotton bags!  I have no long gun to reach ye.  Come, Ahab's compliments






     French Sailor Hist, boys!  let's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor
     Meantime the sky darkens -- the wind rises.)
     comes the music; now for it!  Azore Sailor ( Ascending, and pitching the
     sleep or lie among the coils of rigging.  Oaths a-plenty.) Azore
     sleepy.) Don't know where it is.  French Sailor Beat thy belly, then, and
     tambourine up the scuttle.)
 ( The half of them dance to the tambourine; some go below; some
'em through it.  Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lasses.  Tell 'em it's
--flutterings!  lip!  heart!  hip!  all graze: unceasing touch and go!  not
--give us a whiff, Tash. ( They cease dancing, and gather in clusters.
--not thou nor I can bear the change!  How then, if so be transplanted to yon
--the Heeva-Heeva!  Ah!  low veiled, high palmed Tahiti!  I still rest me on thy
.. <p 171 >
.. <p 172 >
French Sailor Merry-mad!  Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it!
Here you are, Pip; and there's the windlass-bitts; up you mount!  Now, boys!
Jinglers, you say? --there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.  China
Lascar Sailor By Brahma!  boys, it'll be douse sail soon.  The sky-born,
Maltese Sailor ( Reclining and shaking his cap.) It's the waves --the
Sailor ( Dancing.) Go it, Pip!  Bang it, bell-boy!  Rig it, dig it, stig
Sailor ( Reclining on a mat.) Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!
Sailor Aye; girls and a green! --then I'll hop with ye; yea, turn
Sailor Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.
Sailor Spell oh! --whew!  this is worse than pulling after whales in a calm
There's naught so sweet on earth --heaven may not match it! --as those swift
Throw yourselves!  Legs!  Legs!  Iceland Sailor I don't like your floor,
all the waves were women, then I'd go drown, and chassee with them evermore!
and say to himself, how d'ye do?  Partners!  I must have partners!  Sicilian
ballroom of it.  Dance on, lads, you're young; I was once. 3d Nantucket
dance over your grave, I will --that's the bitterest threat of your
glances of warm, wild bosoms in the dance, when the over-arboring arms hide
grasshopper!  Long-Island Sailor Well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more
green navies and the green-skulled crews!  Well, well; belike the whole
green the first day i brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite.  Ah me!
ground-tier butts.  At 'em again!  There, take this copper-pump, and hail
high-tide Ganges turned to wind!  Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!
in Blanket Bay.  What say ye?  There comes the other watch.  Stand by all
it!  Hark ye, lad --fleet interlacings of the limbs --lithe swayings --coyings
it, quig it, bell-boy; Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!  Pip
legs!  Pip!  little Pip!  hurrah with your tambourine!  Pip ( Sulky and
man; he calls that fun: humph!  I save my sweat.  Old Manx Sailor I wonder
mat, but the soft soil has slid!  I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat!
maty; it's too springy to my taste.  I'm used to ice-floors.  I'm sorry to
night-women, that beat head-winds round corners.  O Christ!  to think of the
of us.  Hoe corn when you may, I say.  All legs go to harvest soon.  Ah!  here
sky?  Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee's peak of spears, when they
snow's caps turn to jig it now.  They'll shake their tassels soon.  Now would
split jibs!  tear yourselves!  Tashtego ( Quietly smoking.) That's a white
such ripe, bursting grapes.  Sicilian Sailor ( Reclining.) Tell me not of
taste, observe ye, else come satiety.  Eh, Pagan? ( Nudging.) Tahitan
the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to judgment.  That's
the way -- that's it; thy throat ain't spoiled with eating Amsterdam butter.
throw cold water on the subject; but excuse me.  Maltese Sailor Me too;
wag thy ears.  Jig it, men, I say; merry's the word; hurrah!  Damn me, won't
where's your girls?  Who but a fool would take his left hand by his right,
whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are dancing over.  I'll
world's a ball, as you scholars have it; and so 'tis right to make one
you dance?  Form, now, Indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle?

.. <p 176 >
.. <p 177 >
Moby Dick; those things had gone far to shake the fortitude of many brave
Whale, by chance caught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing they had
a single news-telling sail of any sort; the inordinate length of each
any other whale of that species.  But at length, such calamities did ensue in
appears.  So that in many cases such a panic did he finally strike, that few
as of late the Sperm Whale fishery had been marked by various and not
as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth or more on a stretch, to encounter
attacked; therefore it was, that those who by accident ignorantly gave
battle to Moby Dick; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part, were content
but of all sailors, they are by all odds the most directly brought into
completely escaped them; to some minds it was not an unfair presumption, I
contact with whatever is appallingly astonishing in the sea; face to face
day has the original prestige of the Sperm Whale, as fearfully distinguished
did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints, and
disorderly way they were sprinkled over the entire watery circumference,
every one of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him, as for
existence; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen him; while
from all other species of the leviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen
half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies, which eventually
hearthstone, or aught hospitable beneath that part of the sun; in such
hunters were willing to encounter the perils of his jaw.  But there were still
hunters, to whom the story of the White Whale had eventually come.  Nor did
in that of terra firma, wild rumors abound, wherever there is any adequate
individualizing tidings concerning Moby Dick.  It was hardly to be doubted,
invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from anything that visibly
is wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many a
latitudes and longitudes, pursuing too such a calling as he does, the whaleman
malignity, which whale, after doing great mischief to his assailants, had
many of them adventurously pushing their quest along solitary latitudes, so
matter, so the whale fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life, in
mighty birth.  No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere
miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would not come to any chiselled
mostly, the disastrous encounter between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been
naturally grow out of the very body of all surprising terrible events, --as the
on such or such a meridian, a Sperm Whale of uncommon magnitude and
or devouring amputations --but fatal to the last degree of fatality; those
other and more vital practical influences at work.  Not even at the present
popularly regarded.  And as for those who, previously hearing of the White
reality for them to cling to.  And as the sea surpasses the land in this
repeated disastrous repulses, all accumulating and piling their terrors upon
rumors which sometimes circulate there.  For not only are whalemen as a body
say, that the whale in question must have been no other than moby Dick.  Yet
separate voyage; the irregularity of the times of sailing from home; all
small indeed.  For, owing to the large number of whale-cruisers; the
smitten tree gives birth to its fungi; but, in maritime life, far more than
that several vessels reported to have encountered, at such or such a time, or
the Sperm Whale fishery at large, than to the individual cause.  In that way,
the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given battle to him, was
the spread through the whole world-wide whaling-fleet of the special
the wonderfulness and fearfulness of the
them.  Alone, in such remotest waters, that though you sailed a thousand
these assaults --not restricted to sprained wrists and ancles, broken limbs,
these, with other circumstances, direct and indirect, long obstructed
they not only eye its greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battle to
to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, as it were, to the perils of
transit over the widest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the White Whale
true histories of these deadly encounters.  For not only do fabulous rumors
unexempt from that ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors;
unfrequent instances of great ferocity, cunning, and malice in the monster
who by those rumors, at least, had heard of the White Whale, few of those
wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still the more horrify the


     gained his distinctive appellation of the white Whale; a name, indeed,
     or if indeed he should ever be made to spout thick
.. <p 180 >
.. <p 181 >
Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly seeking with a six inch blade to reach
Turk, no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him with more seeming
a long distance, to those who knew him.  The rest of his body was so streaked,
according to specific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in his
alive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that some whalemen should go
all the more fell for that in his frantic morbidness he at last came to
and spotted, and marbled with the same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had
around him, and oars and men both whirling in the eddies; one captain,
around suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave their boats to
assaults.  More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than
blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly deception; for again in
but immortal (for immortality is but ubiquity in time); that though groves
chewed boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out of the
enough in the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to
even the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds; which the ancient
every apparent symptom of alarm, he had several times been known to turn
fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wild vindictiveness against the whale,
fatalities had attended his chase.  But though similar disasters, however
having been inflicted by an unintelligent agent.  Judge, then, to what pitches
high, pyramidical white hump.  These were his prominent features; the tokens
identify with him, not only all his bodily woes, but all his intellectual and
incarnation of all those malicious agencies which some deep men feel eating in
instances, such seemed the White Whale's infernal aforethought of ferocity,
intangible malignity which has been from the beginning; to whose dominion
knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale had escaped
lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface); and that still
literally justified by his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon
little bruited ashore, were by no means unusual in the fishery; yet, in most
malice.  Small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever since that almost
minds of his more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips of
more be seen.  But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was
more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse (whose waters
of inflamed, distracted fury the
of spears should be planted in his flanks, he would still swim away unharmed;
perhaps aught else.  For, when swimming before his exulting pursuers, with
reaped away ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field.  No turbaned
remarkable hue, nor yet his deformed lower jaw, that so much invested the
seizing the line-knife from his broken prow, had dashed at the whale, as an
spangled with golden gleamings.  Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his
spiritual exasperations.  The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac
splinters, or drive them back in consternation to their ship.  Already several
still further in their superstitions; declaring Moby Dick not only ubiquitous,
strike the imagination with unwonted power.  For, it was not so much his
sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.  His three boats stove
that every dismembering or death that he caused, was not wholly regarded as
that suddenly sweeping his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby Dick had
the fathom-deep life of the whale.  That captain was Ahab.  And then it was,
them, till they are left living on with half a heart and half a lung.  That
these fabulous narrations are almost fully equalled by the realities of the
through a dark blue sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all
uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm whales, but, as
unensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away, his unsullied jet would once
was elsewhere thrown out --a peculiar snow-white wrinkled forehead, and a
were believed to have come from the Holy Land by an underground passage);
whale with natural terror, as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which,
whaleman.  Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these; and
whereby, even in the limitless, uncharted seas, he revealed his identity, at
white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene, exasperating

     What the white whale was to
.. < chapter xlii 6  THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE >
.. <p 184 >
.. <p 185 >
.. <p 185 >
Ahab, has been hinted; what, at times, he was to me, as yet remains unsaid.
Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby Dick, which could
For one, I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and the place; but
White Whale was to them, or how to their unconscious understandings, also, in
aboundingly responded to the old man's ire --by what evil magic their souls
and recklessness in Stubb, and the pervading mediocrity in Flask.  Such a
appalled me.  But how can I hope to explain myself here; and yet, in some
appalling of all brutes.  Or, if for any reason thought to be corporeally
as much their insufferable foe as his; how all this came to be --what the
beauty, as if imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles,
bloody hunt of whales.  Gnawed within and scorched without, with the infixed,
but the deadliest ill.
can go.  The subterranean miner that works in us all, how can one tell
cannibals --morally enfeebled also, by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue
certain it is, that with the mad secret of his unabated rage bolted up and
cheer and howl on his underlings to the attack.  But be all this as it may,
comprehensible form.  It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things
crew, so officered, seemed specially picked and packed by some infernal
delirium at sea was likewise popularly ascribed to a kindred cause.  And so
determinate.  Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that dissembling, that
dim, random way, explain myself I must, else all these chapters might be
does not feel the
fatality to help him to his monomaniac revenge.  How it was that they so
from such a fiendish man!  They were bent on profitable cruises, the profit
harbor the conceit, that for those very reasons he was all the better
head of a crew, too, chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, and
his old acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking in him
immitigable, and supernatural revenge.  Here, then, was this grey-headed,
incapacitated for that, yet such an one would seem superlatively competent to
irresistible arm drag?  What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand still?
it so very unlikely, that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling
its intensity completely overpowered all the rest; and yet so mystical and
japonicas, and pearls; and though various nations have in some way recognised
keyed in him, Ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the
naught.  Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances
not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm, there was another
one only and all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale.  Had any one of
or right-mindedness in Starbuck, the invulnerable jollity of indifference
otherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to the quick, with the
prudent isle were inclined to
qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit so full of rage and wildness as the
sailing in the pequod on the present voyage, sat brooding on his brow.  Nor is
some dim, unsuspected way, he might have seemed the gliding great demon of
terrible casualty which had overtaken him.  The report of his undeniable
the seas of life, --all this to explain, would be to dive deeper than Ishmael
then, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have wrenched the ship
thought, or rather vague, nameless horror concerning him, which at times by
to be counted down in dollars from the mint.  He was intent on an audacious,
too, all the added moodiness which always afterwards, to the very day of
ungodly old man, chasing with curses a Job's whale round the world, at the
unrelenting fangs of some incurable idea; such an one, could he be found,
voyage, on account of such dark symptoms, the calculating people of that
well nigh ineffable was it, that I almost despair of putting it in a
were possessed, that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; the White Whale
when with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no Nantucketer thought him
while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see naught in that brute
whither leads his shaft by the ever shifting, muffled sound of his pick?  Who
would seem the very man to dart his iron and lift his lance against the most



     What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks the
     all around at the horizon, the White Steed gallopingly reviewed them with
     we borrow the expressive hue of the shroud in which we wrap them.  Nor even
.. <p 189 >
.. <p 190 >
Albino is as well made as other men --has no substantive deformity --and yet
Protestant of the Middle American States, why does the passing mention of a
White Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?  Or what
accessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed and Albatross.
agencies, fail to enlist among her forces this crowning attribute of the
and marshals in the van of countless cohorts that endlessly streamed it over
as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of consternation in the
aspects, does Nature in her least palpable but not the less malicious
bailiff in the market-place!  Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary
bluff-bowed and fearless as this mighty steed.  Whether marching amid his aides
chance clue to conduct us to the hidden cause we seek?  Let us try.  But in a
character of the day, does the bare mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the
clothed him with divineness; and that this divineness had that in it which,
downcast and hooded with new-fallen snow?  Or, to the unread, unsophisticated
either wholly or in great part stripped of all direct associations calculated
evangelist, rides on his pallid horse.  Therefore, in his other moods,
experience of all mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this
eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin!  It is that
fancy such long, dreary, speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims,
gracious thing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundest
has been denominated the White Squall.  Nor, in some historic instances, has
heightens the effect of that passage in Froissart, when, masked in the snowy
hue.  It cannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect of
ideality, who happens to be but loosely acquainted with the peculiar
idealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.  But
in our superstitions do we fail to throw the same snowy mantle round our
is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and kings (which
it?  To analyse it, would seem impossible.  Can we, then, by the citation of
legendary record of
man can follow another into these halls.  And though, doubtless, some at least
matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety, and without imagination no
most men, yet few perhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time, and
of the imaginative impressions about to be presented may have been shared by
other world, as of mortal trepidation here.  And from that pallor of the dead,
phantoms; all ghosts rising in a milk-white fog --Yea, while these terrors
presented himself, always to the bravest Indians he was the object of
seize us, let us add, that even the king of terrors, when personified by the
some of those instances wherein this thing of whiteness --though for the time
symbol of their faction, the desperate White Hoods of Ghent murder their
symbolize whatever grand or
terrible.  From its snowy aspect, the gauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas
terror.  But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all that
than the ugliest abortion.  Why should this be so?  Nor, in quite other
the art of human malice omitted so potent an auxiliary.  How wildly it
the dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingering there;
the plains, like an Ohio; or whether with his circumambient subjects browsing
the same sorcery, however modified; --can we thus hope to light upon some
therefore may not be able to recall them now.  Why to the man of untutored
this mere aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes him more strangely hideous
this noble horse, that it was his spiritual whiteness chiefly, which so
though commanding worship, at the same time enforced a certain nameless
though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man to account for
to impart to it aught fearful, but, nevertheless, is found to exert over us
trembling reverence and awe.  Nor can it be questioned from what stands on
warm nostrils reddening through his cool milkiness; in whatever aspect he
whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by the name he bears.  The


     cannot recall to him anything associated with the experience of former
     is, the intensifying agent in things the most appalling to mankind.  Is it
--why, as we have seen, it is at once the most meaning symbol of spiritual
.. <p 187n. >
.. <p 193 >
.. <p 194 >
And when we consider that other theory of the natural philosophers, that all
Polar bear frightens us with so unnatural a contrast.  But even assuming all
With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him who would
actually inherent in substances, but only laid on from without; so that all
appeals with such power to the soul; and more strange and far more portentous
arises from the circumstance, that the irresponsible ferociousness of the
around him.  And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol.  Wonder
before us a leper; and like wilful travellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear
behind him, so that he cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animal
brute; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness, it might be said, only
butterfly cheeks of young girls; all these are but subtile deceits, not
color, and at the same time the concrete of all colors; is it for these
colored and coloring glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched infidel gazes
consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues, the
creature stands invested in the fleece of celestial innocence and love; and
creatures in his green northern home, so that the strange muskiness he smells
deified Nature absolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover
distant oregon?  no: but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, the
fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the whiteness,
frosts of mountains; the desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of
ghostliness of repose in that creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods,
great principle of light, for ever remains white or colorless in itself, and
hence, by bringing together two such opposite emotions in our minds, the
himself blind at the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect
if
immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind with the thought
instinct of the knowledge of the demonism in the world.  Though
landscape of snows --a colorless, all-color of atheism from which we shrink?
muskiness --why will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the ground in
not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, and learned why it
nothing but the charnel-house within; and when we proceed further, and
of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the milky way?  Or is it,
operating without medium upon matter, would touch all objects, even tulips and
other earthly hues --every stately or lovely emblazoning --the sweet tinges of
perils; for what knows he, this New England colt, of the black bisons of
phrensies of affright?  There is no remembrance in him of any gorings of wild
prairies, which this instant they may be trampling into dust.  Thus, then,
prairies; all these, to Ishmael, are as the shaking of that buffalo robe to
reasons that there is such a dumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide
rending, goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the
roses, with its own blank tinge --pondering all this, the palsied universe lies
separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable hideousness of that
somewhere those things must exist.  Though in many of its aspects this visible
strangely tallies with the same quality in the Polar quadruped.  This
sunset skies and woods; yea, and the gilded velvets of butterflies, and the
that as in essence whiteness is not so much a color as the visible absence of
that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids and
that intensified terror.  As for the white shark, the white gliding
the frightened colt!  Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of
the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rustlings of the festooned
things, nay, the very veil of the Christian's Deity; and yet should be as it
this to be true; yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would not have
thousands of miles from Oregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the
which the mystic sign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt,
world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright.  But
ye then at the fiery hunt?




     Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his
     Say what ye will, shipmate; I've sharp ears.  Aye, you are the chap, ain't
     another, the sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct -- say, rather,
     veins, as they are called; continuing their way along a given ocean-line
.. < chapter xliv 12  THE CHART >
.. <p 195 >
.. <p 195 >
.. <p 196 >
.. <p 197 >
Hark ye, Cabaco, there is somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet
On this hint, attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory charts
accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul.  Now, to any one not
additional courses over spaces that before were blank.  At intervals, he would
and currents; and thereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale's
and places in which, on various former voyages of various ships, sperm whales
and shadings which there met his eye; and with slow but steady pencil trace
approaching to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or
been seen on deck; and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too.  I
brought out; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced, and others
cabin after the squall that took place on the night succeeding that wild
chart, with one tithe of such marvellous precision.  Though, in these cases,
collated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond
food; and, also, calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for hunting
fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans, it might seem an absurdly
had been captured or seen.  While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp
heard Stubb tell Flask, one morning watch, that there was something of that
him in particular latitudes; could arrive at reasonable surmises, almost
himself before it, you would have seen him intently study the various lines
his cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts.  Almost every night they were
hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of
hunters believe that, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the
in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the flights of swallows.
it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of
lines and courses on the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was also
locker in the transom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish
of the sperm whale.  Besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to
over inside of ye --nothing else.  Look to the bucket!
ratification of his purpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a
refer to piles of old log-books beside him, wherein were set down the seasons
sea charts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table.  Then seating
sea from Nantucket; you're the chap.  Grin away; we'll see what turns up.
secret intelligence from the Deity --mostly swim in
ship, and for ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his
shipmate, will ye?  It's the three soaked biscuits ye eat for supper turning
sort in the wind.  Tish!  the bucket!
straight wake, yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times he is said to
suspended in chains over his head, continually rocked with the motion of the
swim, generally embraces some few miles in width (more or less, as the vein
that ground in search of his prey.  So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning
the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor's parallel, and
the periodicalness of the sperm whale's resorting to given waters, that many
this planet.  But not so did it seem to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides
though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable,
tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead.  But
was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a view to the more certain
were substituted.  For with the charts of all four oceans before him, Ahab
with such undeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any
world; were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully
wrinkled brow, till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out
ye, that heard the hum of the old Quakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at



     So far as what there may be of a
     and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap down among them; when this hell in
     the circular.  This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees
.  By that circular, it appears that precisely
.. < chapter xlv 24  THE AFFIDAVIT >
.. <p 196n. >
.. <p 200 >
.. <p 200 >
Ahab that had gone to his hammock, was not the agent that so caused
Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly steadfast hunter of the white whale; this
But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with the soul, therefore it
Constantinople?  Yes.  For the peculiar snow-white brow of Moby Dick, and his
Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by an official
Washington, April 16th,
a weariness and faintness of pondering came over him; and in the open air of
and shall he escape?  His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost
case, these spiritual throes in him heaved his being up from its base, and a
chasm seemed opening in him, from which forked flames and lightnings shot up,
circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the National Observatory,
common vitality to which it was conjoined, fled horror-stricken from the
days that have been spent in each month in every district, and the two
desire.  He sleeps with clenched hands; and wakes with his own bloody nails
feeds upon that heart for ever; that vulture the very creature he creates.
from a bed that was on fire.  Yet these, perhaps, instead of being the
him to burst from it in horror again.  The latter was the eternal, living
himself yawned beneath him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship; and
his life-spot became insufferable anguish; and when, as was sometimes the
hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti in the thronged thoroughfares of
in his palms.  often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and
in itself.  God help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creature in
independent being of its own.  Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the
intolerably vivid dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense
light, to be sure, but without an object to color, and therefore a blankness
long after midnight he would throw himself back in reveries --tallied him,
must have been that, in Ahab's case, yielding up all his thoughts and fancies
of latitude by five degrees of longitude; perpendicularly through each of
of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was no longer an integral.
others to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right, have been
out of bodily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for the
principle or soul in him; and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from
seen.
sheep's ear!  And here, his mad mind would run on in a breathless race; till
snow-white hump, could not but be unmistakable.  And have I not tallied the
such a chart is in course of completion; and portions of it are presented in
the characterizing mind, which at other times employed it for its outer
the deck he would seek to recover his strength.  Ah, God!  what trances of
thee; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a Prometheus; a vulture
thoughts through the day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies, and
through each of which districts are three lines; one to show the number of
time but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being, a ray of living
to his one supreme purpose; that purpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of
torments does that man endure who is consumed with one unachieved revengeful
unbidden and unfathered birth.  Therefore, the tormented spirit that glared
unsuppressable symptoms of some latent weakness, or fright at his own resolve,
vehicle or agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguity
were but the plainest tokens of its intensity.  For, at such times, crazy
whale, Ahab would mutter to himself, as after poring over his charts till
which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months; and horizontally
whirled them round and round in his blazing brain, till the very throbbing of
will, forced itself against gods and devils into a kind of self-assumed,
with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state room, as though escaping



     So ignorant are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most palpable
     Was it not so, O Don Miguel!  thou Chilian whale, marked like an old
     the ship Essex, Captain Pollard, of
.. <p 203 >
.. <p 204 >
Miguel, after at various times creating great havoc among the boats of
Nantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean.  One day she saw spouts,
No: because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea.  In
Secondly: People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale is an
Sylla to the classic scholar.  But this is not all.  New Zealand Tom and Don
Tattoo Land?  Was it not so, O Morquan!  King of Japan, whose lofty jet
White Whale, more especially the catastrophe.  For this is one of those
Woods, Captain Butler of old had it in his mind to capture that notorious
and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public record at home,
appear in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast?
blood was spilled for it.
different
disheartening instances where truth requires full as much bolstering as error.
do not know where I can find a better place than just here, to make mention of
done it.  First: In the year
enormous creature of enormous power; but I have ever found that when
escaping from the boats, issued from the shoal, and bore directly down upon
establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the whole story of the
express object as much in view, as in setting out through the Narragansett
fact, did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect
fixed, vivid conception of those perils, and the frequency with which they
four whales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius or
from New Guinea?  Yet I tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made
have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness; when, I declare
historical and otherwise, of the fishery, they might scout at Moby Dick as a
however transient and immediately forgotten that record.  Do you suppose that
intolerable allegory.  First: Though most men have some vague flitting ideas
killed by valiant whaling captains, who heaved up their anchors with that
knowing, and judiciously malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in,
lamps and candles!  not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man's
lowered her boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales.  Ere long,
monstrous fable, or still worse and more detestable, a hideous and
murderous savage Annawon, the headmost warrior of the Indian King Philip.  I
narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold enormousness, they
of the general perils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a
of which had had a death by a whale, some of them more than one, and three
oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay?  Was it not so, O New Zealand Jack!
one or two other things, which to me seem important, as in printed form
point is this: The Sperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful,
recur.  One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters
seek can be established upon testimony entirely independent of my own.  That
several of the whales were wounded; when, suddenly, a very large whale
that had each lost a boat's crew.  For God's sake, be economical with your
that poor fellow there, who this moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off
the coast of New Guinea, is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by
the history of the plagues of Egypt.  But fortunately the special point I here
the ship.  dashing his forehead against her hull, he so stove her in, that
the sounding leviathan --do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will
they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow-white cross against the sky?
thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the vicinity of the
to the Pacific, among many others we spoke thirty different ships, every one
tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back!  In plain prose, here are
upon my soul, I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses, when he wrote
utterly destroy, and sink a large ship; and what is more, the Sperm Whale has
vessels, were finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out, chased and
wonders of the world, that without some hints touching the plain facts,

     for granted the ship had struck against a rock; but when the amazement was a
.. <p 207 >
.. <p 208 >
Justinian was Emperor and Belisarius general.  As many know, he wrote the
Marmora, after having destroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a
Mediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it.  Even now I am certain
Procopius mentions that, during the term of his prefecture at Constantinople,
Procopius, a Christian magistrate of Constantinople, in the days when
Siberian coast, and purchased by my uncle after bartering away the vessel in
The ship, however, was by no means a large one: a Russian craft built on the
a great sea-monster was captured in the neighboring Propontis, or Sea of
a running sperm whale have, in a calm, been transferred to the ship, and
adventure, so full, too, of honest wonders --the voyage of Lionel Wafer, one
affecting the matter presently to be mentioned.  Now, in this history of his,
an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath.  I might proceed
authorities, he has always been considered a most trustworthy and
be content with only one more and a concluding illustration; a remarkable and
but to pursue the ship itself, and long withstand all the lances hurled at
cannot easily be gainsaid.  Nor is there any reason it should be.  Of what
character, that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth, and
corroborative example, if such be needed.  Lionel, it seems, was on his way
darkness of that early hour of the morning, the shock was after all caused by
for death.  And, indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that we took it
great mischief along the spanish land.  but i should not much wonder if, in the
hardly tell where they were or what to think; but every one began to prepare
has been known, not only to chase the assailing boats back to their ships,
head on a gun, was thrown out of his cabin!  Lionel then goes on to impute
head; and, as for his strength, let me say, that there have been examples
him from its decks.  The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that
his pursuers; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his
history of his own times, a work every way of uncommon value.  By the best
horse walks off with a cart.  Again, it is very often observed that, if the
just quoted from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it here for a
little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but found no ground.  The
long time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in the
most significant one, by which you will not fail to see, that not only is
of ancient Dampier's old chums --I found a little matter set down so like that
of the ages; so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon --Verily
often with blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction to
one hundred and fifty leagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a
period of more than fifty years.  A fact thus set down in substantial history
power and malice at times of the sperm whale.  In more than one instance, he
precise species this sea-monster was, is not mentioned.  But as he destroyed
present day, but that these marvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions
retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes.  But I must
secured there; the whale towing her great hull through the water, as a
ships, as well as for other reasons, he must have been a whale; and I am
sperm whale, once struck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so
stating that a great earthquake, somewhere about that time, did actually do
strongly inclined to think a sperm whale.  And I will tell you why.  For a
suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages, and several of
terrible shock, which put our men in such consternation that they could
that those seas are not, and perhaps never can be, in the present
the men were shaken out of their hammocks.  Captain Davis, who lay with his
the most marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the
the shock to an earthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputation by
there is nothing new under the sun.  In the sixth Christian century lived
thither, he says, about four o'clock in the morning, when we were about
to John Ferdinando, as he calls the modern Juan Fernandes.  In our way
unexaggerating historian, except in some one or two particulars, not at all
where the lines attached to
which he sailed from home.  In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned
with several more examples, one way or another known to me, of the great

     That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart
.. <p 211 >
.. <p 212 >
Moby Dick.  For however eagerly and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the
White Whale was seen.  During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to
a certain generous knight-errantism in them, still, while for the love of it
analytic to be verbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still
and hand, backed by a heedful, closely calculating
and passion in the end, it is above all things requisite that temporary
announcement of his quest; yet all sailors of all sorts are more or less
attention to every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his
be stripped of that strange imaginative impiousness which naturally invested
capricious and unreliable --they live in the varying outer weather, and they
captain's quest, and could he, would joyfully disintegrate himself from it,
cashier Ahab.  Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more
competent, could refuse all further obedience to him, and even violently
complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority involves
crew to be subjected to.  For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too
daily appetites.  For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old
evanescent.  The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man,
fall into open relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership, unless
for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, however promissory of life
for the final dash.  Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing.  In times of
gaining ground, Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself.
gaining other pious perquisites by the way.  Had they been strictly held to
get out of order.  He knew, for example, that however magnetic his ascendency
go by, and no perspective promise of it to them, and then this same
hearts of this my savage crew, and playing round their savageness even breeds
him.  Not only that, but the subtle insanity of Ahab respecting Moby Dick was
impunity, both moral and legal, his crew if so disposed, and to that end
in a good degree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the Pequod's
in some respects was over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the
inhale its fickleness --and when retained
intellectual mastership; for to the purely spiritual, the intellectual but
interests and employment should intervene and hold them healthily suspended
it; that the full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the
laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of usurpation; and with perfect
meditation unrelieved by action); that when they stood their long night
no means incapable of swaying him.  To accomplish his object Ahab must use
noways more significantly manifested than in his superlative sense and
obscure background (for few men's courage is proof against protracted
of all hopes of cash --aye, cash.  They may scorn cash now; but let some months
or even frustrate it.  it might be that a long interval would elapse ere the
quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash would soon
related to Ahab personally.  Having impulsively, it is probable, and perhaps
shrewdness in foreseeing that, for the present, the hunt should in some way
some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influences were brought to bear upon
somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the Pequod's
stand in a sort of corporeal relation.  Starbuck's body and Starbuck's coerced
still he knew that for all this the chief mate, in his soul, abhorred his
strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations; but such times are
their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries, picking pockets, and
their one final and romantic object --that final and romantic object, too many
they give chase to Moby Dick, they must also have food for their more common,
thought Ahab, is sordidness.  Granting that the White Whale fully incites the
times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight for
tools; and of all tools used in the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to
usurpation, and the possible consequences of such a suppressed impression
voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing, he had indirectly
watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things to think of than
will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab kept his magnet at Starbuck's brain;
would have turned from in disgust.  I will not strip these men, thought Ahab,
wrest from him the command.  From even the barely hinted imputation of



     The phantoms, for so they then
     Time!  time!  Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported
     give way, all four boats.  Thou, Flask, pull out more to leeward!  Aye,
.. < chapter xlviii 2  THE FIRST LOWERING >
.. <p 215 >
.. <p 216 >
Archy.  Oh, I don't mind 'em, sir, said Archy; I knew it all before now.
Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wide black
Didn't I hear 'em in the hold?  And didn't I tell Cabaco here of it?  What say
Whale when, sounding with his head in one direction, he nevertheless, while
With a start all glared at dark Ahab, who was surrounded by five dusky
a fourth keel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern,
about to throw themselves on board an enemy's ship.  But at this critical
advance of our bows.  For that singular craft at times evinced by the Sperm
and round upon his head.  Less swart in aspect, the companions of this figure
and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in the stern,
aye, sir, cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round his great steering
boats below.  Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when
celerity, were casting loose the tackles and bands of the boat which swung
company were gazing upon these strangers, Ahab cried out to the
concealed beneath the surface, mills round, and swiftly swims off in the
counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere.  While yet the wondering ship's
deck.  Lower away there, I say.  Such was the thunder of his voice, that
down heading to leeward, we confidently looked to see them again directly in
expectantly poised on the gunwale.  So look the long line of man-of-war's men
for shipkeepers -- that is, those not appointed to the boats, by this time
glistening white plaited turban, the living hair braided and coiled round
instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took every eye from the whale.
loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselves widely, so as
mizzen had come down; the line tubs were fixed in their places; the cranes
natives of the Manillas; --a race notorious for a certain diabolism of
oar.  Lay back!  addressing his crew.  There! --there! --there again!  There
opposite quarter --this deceitfulness of his could not now be in action; for
phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air.
relieved the Indian at the main-mast head.  The sailors at the fore and
round in the blocks; with a wallow, the three boats dropped into the sea;
sea like three samphire baskets over high cliffs.  Outside of the bulwarks
secret confidential agents on the water of the devil, their lord, whose
seemed, were flitting on the other side of the deck, and, with a noiseless
she blows right ahead, boys! -- lay back!  Never heed yonder yellow boys,
spite of their amazement the men sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled
starboard quarter.  The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart,
subtilty, and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies and
technically called the captain's, on account of its hanging from the
the command.  Captain Ahab?-- said Starbuck.  Spread yourselves, cried Ahab;
the exact minute to Ahab.  The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she
the sailors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into the tossed
the swart Fedallah and his crew, the inmates of the other boats obeyed not
their eager crews with one hand clung to the rail, while one foot was
there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any
there.  This boat had always been deemed one of the spare boats, though
to cover a large expanse of water.  but with all their eyes again riveted upon
trowsers of the same dark stuff.  But strangely crowning his ebonness was a
was the half-hissed reply.  Lower away then; d'ye hear?  shouting across the
way alarmed, or indeed knew at all of our vicinity.  One of the men selected
went gently rolling before it.  Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone
were of that vivid, tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal
were thrust out; the mainyard was backed, and the three boats swung over the
while, with a dexterous, off-handed daring, unknown in any other vocation,
white-turbaned old man at their head, All ready there, Fedallah?  Ready,
with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips.  A rumpled


     All at once the out-stretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained
     Good a mast-head as any, sir.  Will you mount?  That I will, and thank ye
     some of the ship's company; but Archy's fancied discovery having some time
.. <p 219 >
.. <p 220 >
Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady his way,
accounting for their appearance, they were for the time freed from
all but her trucks.  But little King-Post was small and short, and at the
arm, like a fencer's, thrown half backward into the air, as if to
as that, Flask seemed perched at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to
at the other end of the boat Ahab, with one
blue, thus giving no distantly discernible token of the movement, though
can't see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me on to that.
clearly cut against the alternating depressions of the watery horizon; while
coolly and adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his chip of a
counterbalance any tendency to trip: Ahab was seen steadily managing his
craft, and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea.  Not very far
creeping on board the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn, as well as the
crew sat motionless on the sea.  Instantly the three spread boats in the rear
descried.  Likewise upon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also
displayed his naked chest with the whole part of his body above the gunwale,
distant Flask's boat was also lying breathlessly still; its commander
dry on his shoulders.  And here was Flask now standing, Daggoo with one
enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah.  Meantime, Ahab, out of
fixed, while the boat's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked.  Boat and
for a pedestal.
from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it.  Every man look out along his
hearing of his officers, having sided the furthest to windward, was still
himself by.  At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what
himself should toss, with one dexterous fling landed the little man high and
horizontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer.  As for Fedallah, who was
intensely eager eyes gazed off towards the spot where the chase had last been
lifted arm furnishing him with a breast-band to lean against and steady
manner of wild conjectures as to dark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from
more spacious than the palm of a man's hand, and standing upon such a base
negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palm to Flask's foot, and then
oars!  cried Starbuck.  Thou, Queequeg, stand up!  Nimbly springing up on
of their wonder; and so what with all this and Stubb's confident way of
paused on their way.  The whales had irregularly settled bodily down into the
planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of the boat, the gigantic
platform.  it is used for catching turns with the whale line.  Its top is not
posture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most riotously perverse
previous got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, this had in
putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumed head and bidding him spring as he
ranging ahead of the other boats; a circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew
recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead, a stout sort of post
rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet above the level of the stern
same time little King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition, so that
seen pulling the harpooneer oar, he had thrown aside his black jacket, and
some small measure prepared them for the event.  It took off the extreme edge
steering oar as in a thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn him.
strength, which periodically started the boat along the water like a
superstitious surmisings; though the affair still left abundant room for all
swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered his lofty shoulders
the beginning.  For me, I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen
the triangular raised box in the bow, the savage stood erect there, and with
this loggerhead stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post.  I
triangularly platformed level with the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen
very much, my fine fellow; only I wish you fifty feet taller.  Whereupon
was pulling him.  those tiger yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and
whale-bone; like five trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of
wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain an erect

.. <p 223 >
.. <p 224 >
Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew of his --these were words best omitted
Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails, like a wild hen
Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted that the
Swimming round it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across the
a ledge; the sail collapsed and exploded; a
a skewer through their necks; usage pronouncing that they must have no organs
after her screaming brood; --all this was thrilling.  Not the raw recruit,
allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like, that they would cause
along; the boat going with such madness through the water, that the lee oars
before the squall comes.  There's white water again! --close to!  Spring!
boat, as it would tip for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper
boat; it was the darted iron of Queequeg.  Then all in one welded commotion
but ears, and no limbs but arms, in these critical moments.  It was a sight
came an invisible push from astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on
could scarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from the
declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat's bow with its tail --these
dip into the watery glens and hollows; the keen spurrings and goadings to
earthquake beneath us.  The whole crew were half suffocated as they were
facing the life and death peril so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes
finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle of the hunted sperm
full of quick wonder and awe!  The vast swells of the omnipotent sea; the
gain the top of the opposite hill; the headlong, sled-like slide down its
gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green; the brief suspended agony of the
give it to him!  whispered Starbuck.  A short rushing sound leaped out of the
gunwale, tumbled back to our places.  There we sat up to our knees in the sea,
gush of scalding vapor shot up near by; something rolled and tumbled like an
harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.  Though not one of the oarsmen was then
here; for you live under the blessed light of the evangelical land.  Only the
his prey.  Meanwhile, all the boats tore on.  The repeated specific allusions
infidel sharks in the audacious seas may give ear to such words, when, with
leeward.  Our sail was now set, and, with the still rising wind, we rushed
lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said: Stand up!  and Queequeg,
marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever heat of his first battle;
more visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadows flung
neither ship nor boat to be seen.  Give way, men, whispered Starbuck, drawing
not the dead man's ghost encountering
of Flask to that whale, as he called the fictitious monster which he
on the intense countenance of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew
other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard, when with a
other side; --all these, with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, and
pulled more apart; Starbuck giving chase to three whales running dead to
right and left; the whales seemed separating their wakes.  The boats were
row-locks.  Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist;
some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over the shoulder.  But
sound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter.  Meanwhile the boat was
still booming through the mist, the waves curling and hissing around us like
still further aft the sheet of his sail; there is time to kill a fish yet
stranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for the first time
surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolled along the eight gunwales, like
that the imminent instant had come; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing
the erected crests of enraged serpents.  That's his hump.  There, there,
the first unknown phantom in the other world; --neither of these can feel
the iron, escaped.  Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed.
the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with the wondrous sight of the ivory
this was against all rule; for the oarsmen must put out their eyes, and ram
tornado brow, and eyes of red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after
tossed helter-skelter into the white curdling cream of the squall.  Squall,
upon the sea.  The jets of vapor no longer blended, but tilted everywhere to
waves, that almost seemed threatening to cut it in two; the sudden profound
whale, and harpoon had all blended together; and the whale, merely grazed by
whale.  The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and




     Queequeg, said I, come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and
     Who would have thought
     Yes, that's the law.  I should like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a
     and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for his great
.. < chapter L 27  AHAB'S BOAT AND CREW.  FEDALLAH >
.. <p 227 >
.. <p 227 >
.. <p 228 >
Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering the
Besides, all the days I should now live would be as good as the days that
But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect.  Considering that with
Flask.  If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing.
I think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief
Lazarus lived after his resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many
So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes, whether that
That would disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other left,
a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
account, said
back-foremost into death's jaws?  Can't you twist that smaller?  said Flask.
boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my timber toe.  Oh!  he's a
capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters
devil fetch the hindmost.
family vault.  now then, thought i, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of
fond of that diversion.  This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I
had done the same thing.  After the ceremony was concluded upon the present
heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to this uncommonly
height of a whaleman's discretion?  Certain.  I've lowered for whales from a
implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together, I say, I
imputed to Starbuck's driving on to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall,
into the hands of him who steered the boat --oftentimes a fellow who at that
invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight.
it, Flask!  cried Stubb; if I had but one leg you would not catch me in a
leaking ship in a gale off Cape Horn.  Mr. Flask, said I, turning to
legatee.  It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at
like a quiet ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug
little King-Post, who was standing close by; you are experienced in these
mate, Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent.  I suppose then,
mind that!  here then, from three impartial witnesses, i had a deliberate
months or weeks as the case might be.  I survived myself; my death and burial
my frock, here goes a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the
occasion, I felt all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart.
of common occurrence in this kind of life; considering that at the
our own particular boat was chiefly to be
paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it is right for
prudent Starbuck's boat; and finally considering in what a devil's chase I was
statement of the entire case.  Considering, therefore, that squalls and
superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I must resign my life
that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the
the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
their last wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world more
things, and I am not.  Will you tell me whether it is an unalterable law in
this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself
thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger; considering that
very moment is in his impetuousness upon the point of scuttling the craft
were locked up in my chest.  I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly,
whale face foremost.  Ha, ha!  the whale would give them squint for squint,
with his own frantic stampings; considering that the particular disaster to
wonderful old man!  I don't think it so strange, after all, on that
you know.  I don't know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.



     Days, weeks passed, and under easy
     and every stunsail spread.  The best man in the ship must take the helm.
     man walked.  But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every eye,
.. < chapter li 16  THE SPIRIT-SPOUT >
.. <p 230 >
.. <p 231 >
.. <p 232 >
And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman
Then, with every mast-head manned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the
advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for
after spending his uniform interval there for several successive nights
air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if two antagonistic
all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it disappeared as if it
and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been day.
at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it was descried by
being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata; and the Carrol Ground, an
but to wonder at it.  Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight,
emotions, then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such
ever alluring us on.  Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and
far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one
glittering god uprising from the sea.  Fedallah first descried this jet.  For
had never been.  And so it served us night after night, till no one heeded it
impressive was the cry, and so deliriously exciting, that almost every soul
in a hundred would venture a lowering for them.  You may think with what
in accordance with the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many
indulged in mundane amours.
influences were struggling in her --one to mount direct to heaven, the other
judgment blown, they could not have quivered more; yet still they felt no
like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no more seen
mariner started to his feet as if some winged spirit had lighted in the
midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after, lo!
of these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head,
on board instinctively desired a lowering.  Walking the deck with quick,
or starlight, as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or
rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.  There she blows!  Had the trump of
sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds;
seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude: on such a
self-same whale; and that whale, Moby Dick.  For a time, there reigned, too, a
side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the t'gallant sails and royals to be set,
silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white bubbles at
stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap.  On life and death this old
terror; rather pleasure.  for though it was a most unwonted hour, yet so
that night, you would have thought that in him also two different things were
that night.  Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second time.  This
that off the Azores; off the Cape de Verdes; on the Plate (so called),
that whenever and wherever descried; at however remote times, or in however
the bow.  Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial; seemed some plumed and
the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feel like
the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver; and, by their soft, suffusing
things invested the Pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who swore
through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight night, when all
to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal.  And had you watched Ahab's face
two days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
unstaked, watery locality, southerly from St.  Helena.  It was while gliding
unusual hours; his turban and the moon, companions in one sky.  But when,
voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining
warring.  While his one live leg made lively echoes along the deck, every
what end; when though, according to genesis, the angels indeed consorted
wind.  The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling
with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical Rabbins,
without uttering a single sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly



     South-eastward from the Cape, off the
     and discover sights more sweet and strange than any Cyclades or Islands of
.. < chapter lii 13  THE ALBATROSS >
.. <p 234 >
.. <p 235 >
.. <p 236 >
At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then, in
King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage.  But in pursuit of those
Only her lower sails were set.  A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded
a tyro in the far ocean fisheries --a whaler at sea, and long absent from
accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish, that for
advantage of his windward position, he again seized his trumpet, and knowing
ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name.  As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty
ahoy!  Have ye seen the White Whale?  But as the strange captain, leaning over
and though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern, we six men in
beasts, so torn and bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years
board the stranger, had not the threatening wind forbade.  But taking
by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer and shortly bound
distant Crozetts, a good cruising ground for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed
endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for ever reach new distances,
far mysteries we dream of, or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that,
first mere mention of the White Whale's name to another ship, Ahab for a
fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our own
had been holding the ship in the wind to diminish
her headway, he cried out in his old lion voice, -- Up helm!  Keep her off
home, he loudly hailed -- Ahoy there!  This is the Pequod, bound round the
home.  As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the
in vain strove to make himself heard without it.  Meantime his ship was still
increasing the distance between.  While in various silent ways the seamen of
look-outs at those three mast-heads.  They seemed clad in the skins of
look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.  Ship
mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those forlorn-looking
moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would have lowered a boat to
murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water.  There seemed but little in the
of cruising.  Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and
often before have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the
old man had ever before evinced.  But turning to the steersman, who thus far
perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view of that sight so remarkable to
proud feelings; but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct?  Only
rigging were like the thick branches of trees furred over with hoar-frost.
round the world!  Round the world!  There is much in that sound to inspire
seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore and aft with the
shudder, sleeping in this gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.
skeleton of a stranded walrus.  All down her sides, this spectral appearance
some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away with what
some time or other, swims before all human hearts; while chasing such over
somehow fell from his hand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he
stranger's flanks.  Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must
swung from a beam in the ceiling.  Terrible old man!  thought Starbuck with a
swung over a fathomless sea;
that we left behind secure, were all the time before us.  Were this world an
the Pequod were evincing their observance of this ominous incident at the
the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have leaped from the
the pallid bulwarks, was in the act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it
this round globe, they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us
this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address them to-----
through numberless perils to the very point whence we started, where those
veriest trifles capriciously carry meanings.  Swim away from me, do ye?
was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her
words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless sadness than the insane
world!  Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific ocean!  and





     And as for Pirates, when they chance to cross each other's cross-bones, the
     Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for many years been in
     and such like pretty exclamations.  Why it is that all Merchant-seamen, and
     complete boat's crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
     milliner's tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons.  But the whale-boat
.. <p 239 >
.. <p 240 >
And often you will notice that being conscious of the eyes of the whole
Because, in the case of pirates, say, I should like to know whether that
High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on castors
Johnson never attained to that erudition; Noah Webster's ark does not hold it.
Pirates and Man-of-War's men, and Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful
Whale-ships, generally on a cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails,
also all
and all the time indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other's
another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here.  All
anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a comfortable,
barrels?  And that question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart,
brotherly love about it at all.  As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are
constant use among some fifteen thousand true born Yankees.  Certainly it
cutting each other on the high seas, like a brace of dandies in Broadway;
does not take much to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few
ensigns, that there does not seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and
feeling towards Whale-ships; this is a question it would be hard to answer.
first hail is -- How many skulls? --the same way that whalers hail-- How many
fishery.  In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is rowed
foibles himself.  So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the
for they are infernal villains on both sides, and don't like to see overmuch
grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about spouters and blubber-boilers,
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
has a Gam, a thing so utterly unknown to all other ships that they never
has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at all.
heard of the name even; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only
in such a prodigious hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible.
lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the pirate has no solid basis to
like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs.  And as for a tiller, the
man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has no proper foundation for his
needs a definition, and should be incorporated into the Lexicon.  With that
occasion, and the captain, having no
of each other's villanous likenesses.  But look at the godly, honest,
oftentimes pass on without so much as a single word of recognition, mutually
place to sit in, is pulled off to his visit all standing like a pine tree.
profession of theirs has any peculiar glory about it.  It sometimes ends in
professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so has the whale
rig.  As for Men-of-War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first go
sea, the whalers have most reason to be sociable --and they are so.  Whereas,
some merchant ships crossing each other's wake in the mid-Atlantic, will
sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a pretty little
stand on.  but what is a gam?  you might wear out your index-finger running
superior altitude.  Hence, I conclude, that in boasting himself to be high
they exchange visits by boats' crews: the two captains remaining, for the
through such a string of silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of
time, on board of one ship, and the two chief mates on the other.  There is
uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at the gallows.  And besides, when a
unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free-and-easy whaler!  What does the
up and down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word.  Dr.
view, let me learnedly define it.  Gam.  Noun --A social meeting of two (or more)
whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a
whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort of decent weather?  She



     for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unentered forests, where
     the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect safety at her port
     though in after life he had long followed our austere Atlantic and your
--Buffalo!  Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?" said Don
.. <p 243 >
.. <p 244 >
Lake Erie, Don; but--I crave your courtesy--may be, you shall soon hear further
Ontario, and Huron, and Superior, and Michigan, --possess an ocean-like
Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.  On the eastern shore of our
alike the full-rigged merchant ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the
and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet
as direful as any that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks are,
been nurtured by all those agrarian
by two great contrasting nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long
capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as Winnebago villages; they float
captain, having some unusual reason for believing that rare good luck awaited
common.  They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen.  But the
contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite as vengeful and full of social
could not find it after searching the hold as low down as was possible in
days went by, and not only was the leak yet undiscovered, but it sensibly
dotted all round their banks; here and there are frowned upon by batteries,
expansiveness, with many of the ocean's noblest traits; with many of its
far manilla; this lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, had yet
for out of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full many a
founder by the way, because his pumps were of the best, and being
freebooting impressions popularly connected with the open ocean.  For in their
handled Bowie-knives.  Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted
have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at his maternal sea;
him in those latitudes; and therefore being very averse to quit them, and
his hull hove out and repaired.  Though no small passage was before her, yet,
human recognition which is the meanest slave's right; thus
if the commonest chance favored, he did not at all fear that his ship would
increased.  So much so, that now taking some alarm, the captain, making all
inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean nurtured; as much
interflowing aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours --Erie, and
keep the ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her.  In truth,
maritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from the East,
midnight ship with all its shrieking crew.  Thus, gentlemen, though an
might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency of
of all that.  Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships,
of an audacious mariner as any.  And for Radney, though in his infancy he may
overbearing of Radney, the mate, a Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked
periodically relieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily
quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-horn
rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her cruisings, the mariners
rimmed varieties of races and of climes.  They contain round archipelagoes of
romantic isles, even as the Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored
sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among the islands, there to have
steamer, and the beech canoe; they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts
the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of kings in Gothic genealogies;
the leak not being then considered at all dangerous, though, indeed, they
those same woods harboring wild Afric beasts of prey, and silken creatures
thunderings of naval victories; at intervals, they yield their beaches to
traits; and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed,
vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo.  "Lakeman!
well nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very prosperous breezes,
well-nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to
whose exported furs give robes to Tartar Emperors; they mirror the paved
wild barbarians, whose red painted faces flash from out their peltry wigwams;
without the occurrence of the least fatality, had it not been for the brutal
working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but no good luck came; more


     but it was to no purpose.  And in this way the two went once slowly round the
     with truly nautical duties, such being the case with his comrades.  I mention
 "Aye, aye, sir," said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket.  "Lively, boys, lively,
.. <p 247 >
Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom
Radney had spat in his face.  Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will
Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs;
all these particulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood
and sweep down the planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive
and then, without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as
any already ireful being --a repugnance most felt, when felt at all, by
as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for all his first nameless
be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the time.  Such,
between the two men.  But there was more than this: the order about the
bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow.  Now what cozening
but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening; it has been known to
club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near by.  Heated and irritated
coming still closer to him, where the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the
commanding him to do his bidding.  Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating
comprehended when the mate uttered his command.  But as he sat still for a
consequently he should have been freed from any trivial business not connected
deliberately repeated his intention not to obey.  Seeing, however, that his
domineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his command;
feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing
fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney to meddle with such a man in
forbearance had not the slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable
gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive love of
gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.  Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a
he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor, the Lakeman paused
heard which denotes the fullest tension of life's utmost energies.  Quitting
in the mate; but somehow still smothering the conflagration within him,
incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face, furiously
intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man;
little broken by the bodily exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him
matters consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.  Now, gentlemen,
meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper's
moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate's malignant eye and
neatness in seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without first
now!"  And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed
on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer: "Mr. Radney, I will not obey
or nothing all day.  To this, Radney replied with an oath, in a most
panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face fiery red, his eyes
perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow-match
prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard.  Besides, it was
really valiant men even when aggrieved --this nameless phantom feeling,
round the windlass, steadily followed by the mate with his menacing hammer,
saying that sweeping the deck was not his business, and he would not do it.
shovel was almost as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though
silently burning along towards them; as he instinctively saw all this, that
strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in
sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece of household work which in all times
that corporeally exasperated state, I know not; but so it happened.
the customary sweepers; who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little
the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went forward all
the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking
their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was
turns at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all,
understand this; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman fully
washing their faces.  But in all vessels this broom business is the
windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him that
without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the
you.  Take that hammer away, or look to yourself."  But the predestinated mate


     But sliding down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into
     and we're your men; but we won't be flogged." "Turn to!  I make no
 "Turn to!  turn to! --I make no promise; --to your duty!  Do you want to sink
.. <p 250 >
.. <p 251 >
Christian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric
Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true, the captain a little
Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between quietly reaping in a
Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil
Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all; they succeeded in
Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling captains.  Nor does it at
What say ye, men?" turning to his comrades.  A fierce cheer was their
a man of us turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us.
against ye unless ye attack us; but till you say the word about not flogging
ain't those mincing knives down in the forecastle there, men?  look to those
all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to many thousands of our
barricade, and striding up and down there, defied the worst the pistols could
behind the barricade.  "come out of that, ye pirates!" roared the captain,
boy's business; he might have known me before this; I told him not to prick
casks in a line with the windlass, these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves
chicha upon his silvery ruffles.  "No need to travel!  The world's one Lima.  I
claim our discharge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don't want a row;
close up to the revolving border of the confusion, and prying into the heart
cried the ringleader to his men.  Most of them were against it; but at
death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands.
desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their
do; but gave the captain to understand distinctly, that his (Steelkilt's)
don't be a fool; forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently,
down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious
duty.  "Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?" demanded their
emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of
ensued; while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain danced up and
gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing about three or four large
had thought, now, that at your temperate North the generations were cold and
handspikes, my hearties.  Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word;
have shipped for the cruise, d'ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can
him a moment, and then said: --"I tell you what it is now, Captain, rather
his arm towards him.  "there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who
his eye on the Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these: --"It's not
holy as the hills. --But the story."  I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman
it's not our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready to work, but we
its most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of mankind, except
now menacing them with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the
of it with his pike, sought to prick out the object of his resentment.  But
our fault; we didn't want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was
promises, turn to, I say!" "Look ye, now," cried the Lakeman, flinging out
raised a pistol.  "Sink the ship?" cried Steelkilt.  "Aye, let her sink.  Not
response.  The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping
ringleader.
rural boys and young men born along its line, the probationary life of the
scoundrel, and smoke him along to the quarter-deck.  At intervals, he ran
seas.  "I see!  I see!  " impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his
shook the back-stay.  Hardly had he done so, when he was surrounded by the
steward.  "Come out of that, ye cut-throats!"  Steelkilt leaped on the
than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we won't lift a hand
the buffalo; I believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw;
the ship, by knocking off at a time like this?  Turn to!" and he once more
the uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it towards the forecastle.
three junior mates and the four harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck.
us, we won't do a hand's turn." "Down into the forecastle then, down with
won't be flogged." "Turn to!" roared the Captain.  Steelkilt glanced round
ye, I'll keep ye there till ye're sick of it.  Down ye go." "Shall we?"


     and let us hear what he can say for himself."  For a moment the exhausted
     the forecastle.  In a few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand
 "You are a coward!" hissed the Lakeman.  "So I am, but take that."  The mate
--justice demanded it; but for the present, considering their timely
.. <p 254 >
.. <p 255 >
Captain; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck
He paused: and then pausing no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt's
a pale man, with a bandaged head, arrested them --Radney the chief mate.  Ever
administered in the vernacular.  "But as for you, ye carrion rogues," turning
all hands were turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron
and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords; and shrieked
and foot, the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his
before them, "the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!"  At sunrise he
below, a clamor was heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors
collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and, side by side,
crew.  Entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their
dared not attempt, he snatched the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.
day his craft first struck the cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite
flog them all round --thought, upon the whole, he would do so --he ought to
for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't give up.  Take that gag from his mouth,
frighten me" --and the Captain drew off with the rope to strike.  "Best not,"
heads sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn.  "My wrist is
her captain was just as willing to lower for a fish that moment, as on the
hissed the Lakeman.  "But I must," --and the rope was once more drawn back for
honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder.  But all these were
into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in three sentences;
mainly at Steelkilt's instigation, they had resolved to maintain the
mind it well--- if you flog me, I murder you!" "Say ye so?  then see how ye
mumbling something about his being willing and able to do what the captain
mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped jaws, and then painfully
of all her other perils, the Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and
of the two traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their
out for the Captain at midnight.  Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in
own instance they were put down in the ship's run for salvation.  Still, no
perfidious allies, who at once claimed the
pumps clanged as before.  Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired
rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said,"I
reached port, desert her in a body.  But in order to insure the speediest end
running up, besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the
scene.  Such was the state of his mouth, that he could hardly speak; but
sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest.  On the contrary, it seemed, that
since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the
sprained with ye!" he cried, at last; "but there is still rope enough left
strictest peacefulness, obey all orders to the last, and, when the ship
summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled from those who had
surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly
taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a good mind to
the dark for the blood, he and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for
the stroke.  Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the
they hung till morning.  "Damn ye," cried the Captain, pacing to and fro
threat, whatever that might have been.  The three men were then cut down,
to the three men in the rigging --"for you, I mean to mince ye up for the
to the voyage, they all agreed to another thing --namely, not to sing out for
try-pots;" and, seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs
tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched the whole
twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss, "What I say is this --and
was in the very act of striking, when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm.
were hurrying to execute the order,
were seized up into the mizen rigging, like three quarters of meat, and there
whales, in case any should be discovered.  For, spite of her leak, and spite
won't do it --let him go--cut him down: d'ye hear?"  But as the junior mates


     On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, which seemed to
     business of heaving down the ship to stop the leak.  But to such unresting
 "A pretty scholar," laughed the Lakeman."Adios, Senor!" and leaping into the
.. <p 258 >
.. <p 259 >
But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his
Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with him, and
Steelkilt; "no lies." "I am bound to Tahiti for more men." "Very good.  Let
Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his crew.
The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it was
With one foot on each prow of the yoked war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him
a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living opal in the
again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared.  In good
anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran out his two
astern from the whirlpool; calmly looking on, he thought his own thoughts.
band of whites necessitated, both by night and by day, and so extreme was the
blinding foam that blent two whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat
blue morning sea.  Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole career of
cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning the
captain.  "Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head.  Now, repeat after
captain.  "Where are you bound?  and for what are you bound?" demanded
civilized creature resided.  There, headed by the Lakeman, all but five or
distance, Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of Radney's red woollen
handful, the captain called upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious
hard work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready again for sea,
have touched at a low isle of corals.  He steered away from it; but the
heave to, or he would run him under water.  the captain presented a pistol.
his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood
into the sea, on the other flank of the whale.  He struck out through the
island, and remain there six days.  If I do not, may lightnings strike me!"
it turned out, seizing a large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting
knife to the line.  He cut it; and the whale was free.  But, at some
mate.  That instant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back, the boat
me board you a moment --I come in peace."  With that he leaped from the canoe,
me.  As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yonder
of command.  Moreover, when the four boats were lowered, the mate's got the
of the boat's bottom, the Lakeman had slackened the line, so as to drop
righted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney was tossed over
sail for some other harbor.  The ship's company being reduced to but a
savage craft bore down on him; and soon the voice of Steelkilt hailed him to
seems, in a boat.  And now his bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale's
setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the wind for
shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him.  All four boats gave chase
six of the foremast-men deliberately deserted among the palms; eventually, as
spear in hand, Radney sprang to the bow.  He was always a furious man, it
spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that veil, wildly seeking
start; and none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he
strained at his oar.  After a stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and,
struck as against a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing
sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer between his jaws; and rearing high up
swam to the boat; and climbing the gunwale, stood face to face with the
them in so heavy a vessel.  After taking counsel with his officers, he
these events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was charted.
they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst not put off with
time, the Town-Ho reached her port --a savage, solitary place --where no
to remove himself from the eye of Moby Dick.  But the whale rushed round in a
to scorn; assuring him that if the pistol so much as clicked in the lock, he
topmost back.  Nothing loath, his bowsman hauled him up and up, through a
up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word
vigilance over their dangerous allies was this small
with him, plunged headlong again, and went down.  Meantime, at the first tap
would bury him in bubbles and foam.  "What do you want of me?  cried the




     A Voyage round Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending
     Advancement of Learning you will find some curious whales.  But quitting all
     antediluvian Hindoo.  It is Guido's picture of Perseus rescuing Andromeda
, and hoisted on deck.  I doubt not the
, entitled A Whaling Voyage to
.. <p 262 >
.. <p 263 >
Christian painter's portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better than the
Gate leading from the Thames by water into the Tower.  Then, there are the
Harris's collection of voyages there are some plates of whales extracted from
Prodromus whales of the old Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah's whale, as depicted
Spitzbergen in the ship Jonas in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland,
Vishnu in the form of leviathan, learnedly known as the Matse Avatar.  But
a Dutch book of voyages, A. D.
a Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scale from one killed
according to the accompanying scale, to a full grown sperm whale, would make
and in those days, and even down to a comparatively late period, dolphins
and other embellishments of some ancient books you will at times meet with
antique vases.  Though universally denominated a dolphin, I nevertheless call
backs.  In another plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing the
before any of them actually came into being.  No wonder then, that in some
captain had this veracious picture taken for the benefit of his marines.  To
captain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking out of that eye!  Nor are the
from the sea-monster or whale.  Where did Guido get the model of such a
his own Perseus Descending, make out one whit better.  The huge corpulence
hot springs and cold, Saratoga and Baden-Baden, come bubbling up from his
in the prints of old Bibles and the cuts of old primers.  What shall be said
inch of water.  It has a sort of howdah on its back, and its distended tusked
like the tapering tail of an anaconda, than the broad palms of the true
master.  In one of those plates the whales, like great rafts of logs, are
mention but one thing about it, let me say that it has an eye which applied,
most conscientious compilations of Natural History for the benefit of the
mouth into which the billows are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors'
of that Hogarthian monster undulates on the surface, scarcely drawing one
of the latter, yet that small section of him is all wrong.  It looks more
of these?  As for the book-binder's whale winding like a vine-stalk round the
of whaling should have been there shadowed forth.  The Hindoo whale referred
on the coast of Mexico, August,
publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during the Revival of Learning;
purely fabulous creature, imitated, I take it, from the like figures on
purporting to be sober, scientific delineations, by those who know.  In old
represented lying among ice-isles, with white bears running over their living
sort our noble profession
stock of a descending anchor --as stamped and gilded on the backs and
strange creature as that?  Nor does Hogarth, in painting the same scene in
the Spermaceti Whale Fisheries.  In this book is an outline purporting to be
the eye of that whale a bow-window some five feet long.  Ah, my gallant
these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at those pictures of leviathan
this book-binder's fish an attempt at a whale; because it was so intended
though this sculpture is half man and half whale, so as only to give the tail
title-pages of many books both old and new --that is a very picturesque but
to, occurs in a separate department of the wall, depicting the incarnation of
trades and pursuits, every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages
unexhausted brain.  In the title-page of the original edition of the
very curious touches at the whale, where all manner of spouts, jets d'eau,
were popularly supposed to be a species of the Leviathan.  In the vignettes
whale with perpendicular flukes.  Then again, there is an imposing quarto,
whale's majestic flukes.  But go to the old Galleries, and look now at a great
when the device was first introduced.  It was introduced by an old Italian
written by one Captain Colnett, a Post Captain in the English navy, entitled



    
     PICTURES OF WHALING SCENES In connexion with the monstrous pictures of
     Whale; Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier's, and Beale's.  In the
.. < chapter lvi 6  OF THE LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES OF WHALES, AND THE TRUE >
.. <p 266 >
.. <p 266 >
.. <p 267 >
Browne are pretty correct in contour; but they are wretchedly engraved.  That
Scoresby; but they are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable
Whale is depicted in full majesty of might, just risen beneath the boat from
alongside the barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale, that rolls his
and taken from paintings by one Garnery.  Respectively, they represent
attacks on the Sperm and Right Whale.  In the first engraving a noble Sperm
be too fastidious in your curiosity touching this Leviathan.
better than theirs; but, by great odds, Beale's is the best.  All Beale's
by his living hunters.  But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though
covering.  However recklessly the whale may sometimes serve us, said
deficiency, because it is by such pictures only, when at all well done,
degree of exactness.  So there is no earthly way of finding out precisely what
drawings of this whale are good, excepting the middle figure in the picture of
eternally stove and sunk by him.  Wherefore, it seems to me you had best not
excite the civil scepticism of some parlor men, is admirably correct and
frontispiece, boats attacking Sperm Whales, though no doubt calculated to
going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, you run no small risk of being
good a one.  In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing
human hand, minus only the thumb.  This fin has four regular bone-fingers,
humorous Stubb one day, he can never be truly said to handle us without
impression.  He has but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad
in some details not the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling
in that prow, for that one single incomputable flash of time, you behold an
is not his fault though.  Of the Right Whale, the best outline pictures are in
life-like in its general effect.  Some of the Sperm Whale drawings in J. Ross
lodged in their fleshy covering, as the human fingers in an artificial
mittens.  For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you must
modern, especially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc.  But I
much nearer than another, but none can hit it with any very considerable
needs conclude that the great Leviathan is that one creature in the world
oarsman, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the whale, and in
of affright; while in the black stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon
of the swimming crew are scattered about the whale in contrasting expressions
pass that matter by.  i know of only four published outlines of the great Sperm
previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to.  Huggins's is far
scenes to be anywhere found, are two large French engravings, well executed,
sea; the wooden poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it; the heads
stories of them which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and
terrific wreck of the stoven planks.  The prow of the boat is partially
that you can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen
the act of leaping, as if from a precipice.  The action of the whole thing is
the index, middle, ring, and little finger.  But all these are permanently
the profundities of the ocean, and bearing high in the air upon his back the
the scene.  Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details of this
the side fin, the bones of which almost exactly answer to the bones of the
the whale really looks like.  And the only mode in which you can derive even a
this book will be incidentally shown.  It is also very curiously displayed in
three whales in various attitudes, capping his second chapter.  His
tolerable idea of his living contour, is by
unbroken, and is drawn just balancing upon the monster's spine; and standing
whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, I could not draw so
whales, I am strongly tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous
which must remain unpainted to the last.  True, one portrait may hit the mark
wonderfully good and true.  The half-emptied line-tub floats on the whitened

    
.. < chapter lvii 23  OF WHALES IN PAINT; IN TEETH; IN WOOD; IN >
.. <p 269 >
.. <p 270 >
.. <p 271 >
King of the Cannibals; and ready at any moment to rebel against him.  Now,
Leviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks against them in
SHEET-IRON; IN STONE; IN MOUNTAINS; IN STARS On Tower-hill, as you go down
Sperm Whale-teeth, or ladies' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone, and
With the same marvellous patience, and with the same single shark's tooth,
a surf of green surges.  Then, again, in mountainous countries where the
accuracy.  At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales
and full of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints of that fine
application.  As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage.
at any rate; and his stump as unquestionable a stump as any you will find in
business.  But, in general, they toil with their jack-knives alone; and, with
churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for weather-cocks; but
civilization inevitably restores a man to that condition in which God placed
come.  His three whales are as good whales as were ever published in Wapping,
dentistical-looking implements, specially intended for the skrimshandering
exhibited
from some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles
great a trophy of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon.  For, with but a bit
high broken cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the
him, i.  e.  what is called savagery.  Your true whale-hunter is as much a
his wonderful patience of industry.  An ancient Hawaiian war-club or
hung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door.  When the porter is
in Nantucket, and New Bedford, and Sag Harbor, you will come across lively
ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough material, in
integrity) is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale.  Any time
labelled with Hands off!  you cannot examine them closely enough to decide
net-work has been achieved; and it has cost steady years of steady
of broken sea-shell or a shark's tooth, that miraculous intricacy of wooden
of his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture, not
of the small dark slabs of the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met
old Dutch savage, Albert Durer.  Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out
one of the boats (presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original
one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his domestic hours, is
other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the numerous little
packed in its maziness of design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield;
plain, you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the
quite as workmanlike, but as close
ruefully contemplating his own amputation.  Throughout the Pacific, and also
sailors say) holding a painted board before him, representing the tragic
savage as an Iroquois.  I myself am a savage; owning no allegiance but to the
scene in which he lost his leg.  There are three whales and three boats; and
seldom remarkable as faithful essays.  On the spires of some old-fashioned
sketches of whales and whaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on
sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best.  But these knocking whales are
spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity and elaboration of carving, is as
stump-speech does the poor whaleman make; but, with downcast eyes, stands
that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor, they will turn you out anything
that stump to an incredulous world.  But the time of his justification has now
the western clearings.  But, though for ever mounted on that stump, never a
their hours of ocean leisure.  Some of them have little boxes of
these ten years, they tell me, has that man held up that picture, and
they are so elevated, and besides that are to all intents and purposes so
to quicken the activity of the excited seamen.
to the London docks, you may have seen a crippled beggar (or kedger, as the
traveller is continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there
upon their merit.  In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of
with in the forecastles of American whalers.  Some of them are done with much
you please, in the way of a mariner's fancy.  Long exile from Christendom and


     Slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the
     caused by the vast drifts of brit continually floating in those latitudes,
.. < chapter lix 4  SQUID >
.. <p 272n. >
.. <p 274 >
.. <p 275 >
.. <p 275 >
Again the phantom went down, but on re-appearing once more, with a
God keep thee!  Push not off from that isle, thou canst never return!
In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher and
Pequod still held on her way north-eastward towards the island of Java; a
That part of the sea known among whalemen as the Brazil Banks does not bear
against the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks
alluring jet would be seen.  But one transparent blue morning, when a
and soundings there, but because of this remarkable meadow-like appearance,
any stagnant calm; when the long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemed a
augment; yet for ever and for ever, to the crack of doom, the sea will
brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes, as the dainty
carrying on eternal war since the world began.  Consider all this; and then
creatures glide under water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherously
creatures which itself hath spawned.  Like a savage tigress that tossing in
destroyed the wrecked ships of last year.  Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood
differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not a miracle upon
embellished shape of many species of sharks.  Consider, once more, the
encompassed by all the horrors of the half known life.
ever; yet not a modern sun ever sets, but in precisely the same manner the
feet of Korah and his company the live ground opened and swallowed them up for
gentle air impelling her keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her three
gleamed.  It seemed not a whale; and yet is this Moby Dick?  thought Daggoo.
golden finger laid across them, enjoining some secresy; when the slippered
hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure.  Consider also the devilish
higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed before our
insult and murder him, and pulverize the stateliest, stiffest frigate he can
is not yet subsided; two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.  Wherein
leaving so much as a widow.  That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean
like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider, the masterless ocean
live sea swallows up ships and crews.  But not only is the sea such a foe to
make; nevertheless, by the continual repetition of these
man who is an alien to it, but it is also a fiend to its own offspring;
moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank.  Then once more arose, and silently
ocean, that with Portuguese vengeance had whelmed a whole world without
of ships.  No mercy, no power but its own controls it.  Panting and snorting
on a plain.  And still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, the lonely,
overruns the globe.  Consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded
prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills.  Thus glistening for a
sea and the land; and do you not find a strange analogy to something in
skill, and however much, in a flattering future, that science and skill may
soul of man there lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but
stillness almost preternatural spread over the sea, however unattended with
tall tapering masts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as three mild palms
that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of there being shallows
the jungle overlays her own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales
the other?  Preternatural terrors rested upon the Hebrews, when under the
turn to this green, gentle, and most docile earth; consider them both, the
universal cannibalism of the sea; all whose creatures prey upon each other,
very impressions, man has lost that sense of the full awfulness of the sea
visible sphere a strange spectre was seen by Daggoo from the main-mast-head.
waves whispered together as they softly ran on; in this profound hush of the
where the Right Whale is often chased.
which aboriginally belongs to it.  The first boat we read of, floated on an
worse than the Persian host who murdered his own guests; sparing not the
yourself?  For as this appalling ocean surrounds the verdant land, so in the
.. <p 278 >
.. <p 279 >
American fishery almost entirely superseded hemp as a material for
By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one
Circassian to behold.  The whale line is only two thirds of an inch in
a dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla is as a golden-haired
against his wrist in rowing; and also passing between the men, as they
alternately sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocks or grooves in
are but one half-inch in thickness; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like
are exposed; the lower end terminating in an eye-splice or loop coming up
arrangement is indispensable for common safety's sake; for were the lower end
attached to the harpoon.  In these instances, the whale of course is shifted
block towards the tub, so as in the act of coiling to free it from all
business, carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through a
but so as to form one round, cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded sheaves,
by no means adds to the rope's durability or strength, however much it may
case of ordinary ropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hemp
completely disengaged from everything.  This arrangement of the lower end is
convenient to the sailor for common ship use; yet, not only would the ordinary
critical ice, which will bear up a considerable distributed weight, but
does, he would not stop there, for the doomed boat would infallibly be
dragged down after him into the profundity of the sea; and in that case no
elsewhere presented, I have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horrible
equal to three tons.  In length, the common sperm whale-line measures
first boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort.  Second: This
from the bottom against the side of the tub, and hanging over its edge
give it compactness and gloss.  Of late years the Manilla rope has in the
hundred and twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly
it of an additional line from a neighboring boat, in case the stricken whale
its tub.  Some harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this
leg, or entire body off, the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in
like a mug of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the other; though the
logger-head there, is again carried forward the entire length of the boat,
more pliable to the rope-maker, and also renders the rope itself more
more soft and elastic; and I will add (since there is an aesthetics in all
must be subjected; but as most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in general
necessary on two accounts.  First: In order to facilitate the fastening to
not very much of a concentrated one.  When the painted canvas cover is clapped
of one; the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs.  There is
of proportionate depth, makes a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks
of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were the whale then to run
on the american line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a
or kink in the coiling would, in running out, infallibly take somebody's arm,
or layers of concentric spiralizations, without any hollow but the heart,
or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese.  As the least tangle
possible wrinkles and twists.  In the English boats two tubs are used instead
prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales.  Both ends of the line
quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it
readily into the boat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the American
resting crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man's oar, so that it jogs
should sound so deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originally
slightly vapored with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the
some advantage in this; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more
something over two hundred fathoms.  Towards the stern of the boat it is
spirally coiled away in the tub, not like the worm-pipe of a still though,
the extreme pointed prow of the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the size
the line out to the end almost in a single, smoking minute as he sometimes
the upper end of the line is taken aft from the tub, and passing round the
thickness.  At first sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is.
things), is much more handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp.  Hemp is
town-crier would ever find her again.  Before lowering the boat for the chase,
tub, nearly three feet in diameter and
whale-line.  The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp,
whale-lines; for, though not so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far
.. <p 282 >
.. <p 283 >
.. <p 284 >
But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild.  Kee-hee!
Start her, Tash, my boy --start her, all; but keep cool, keep cool--
accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and regularly spouted the sparkling
an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun's rays like a mirror.  But lazily
an announcement immediately followed by Stubb's producing his match and
assault.  Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish.  All alive to his
boys --that's all.  Start her!  Woo-hoo!  Wa-hee!  screamed the Gay-Header in
brine into the air.  clear away the boats!  luff!  cried Ahab.  And obeying
but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam,
close under our lee, not forty fathoms off, a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling
closed eyes; like vices my hands grasped the shrouds; some invisible,
counted upon the honor of the capture.  It was obvious, now, that the whale
cucumbers is the word --easy, easy --only start her like grim death and
denizens of more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
ere the boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward,
fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious
forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the seamen at the
fro I idly swayed in what seemed an enchanted air.  No resolution could
gracious agency preserved me; with a shock I came back to life.  And lo!
grinning devils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
had at length become aware of his pursuers.  All silence of cautiousness was
his own order, he dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle the
his sounding had elapsed, the whale rose again, and being now in advance of
his vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly burgher smoking his pipe of a
igniting his pipe, for now a respite was granted.  After the full interval of
in the water like the capsized hull of a frigate, his broad, glossy back, of
in-shore ground off Peru.  It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and
jeopardy, he was going head out; that part obliquely projecting from the
like Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats,
mad yeast which he brewed.  Start her, start her, my men!  Don't hurry
main and mizen mast-heads were already drowsy.  So that at last all three of
monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty feet into the air, and then
noiseless sails being set.  Presently, as we thus glided in chase, the
not an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers.  So seated
play.  And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered on his crew to the
reply, raising some old war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the
sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.  There go flukes!  was the cry,
some enchanter's wand, the sleepy ship and every sleeper in it all at once
spoke.  start her, now; give 'em the long and strong stroke, tashtego.
spokes.  The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and
started into wakefulness; and more than a score of voices from all parts of
strained boat involuntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading
stroke which the eager Indian gave.
that thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders that
the smoker's boat, and much nearer to it than to any of the others, Stubb
the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from aloft, shouted forth the
their indolent crests; and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to
therefore no longer of use.  Paddles were dropped, and oars came loudly into
thunder-claps,  that's all, cried Stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he
undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever and anon tranquilly spouting
us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swing that we made there
voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is, it affords
warm afternoon.  But that pipe, poor whale, was thy last.  As if struck by
was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman.  The waves, too, nodded
we swiftly but silently paddled along; the calm not admitting of the
went out of my body; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum
west, and the sun over all.  Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my
will, long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn.  Ere
with my shoulders leaning against the slackened royal shrouds, to and
withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing all consciousness, at last my soul
yourselves; take plenty of time --but start her; start her like


     A word concerning an incident in the last
-- Stand up, and give it to him!  He now has to drop and secure his oar,
.. < chapter lxii 19  THE DART >
.. <p 283n. >
.. <p 284n. >
.. <p 286 >
.. <p 287 >
It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the entire
Mr. Stubb, said Daggoo.  Yes; both pipes smoked out!  and withdrawing his
Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be stated,
a moment, stood thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.
air of the day.  And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled
and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of themselves and every one else.  It is
at one and the same time.  In this straining, bawling state, then, with his
back to the fish, all at once the exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry
chapter.  According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat
contracting his spout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations.  At
craft, takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.  Now, I care not who
dart, the heavy implement has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty
down his motionless flanks into the sea.  His heart had burst!  He's dead,
expected to pull his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected
feet.  But however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is
fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are successful; no wonder that so
from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharp-pointed New York
harpoon and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be expected of him,
have tried it.  For one, I cannot bawl very heartily and work very recklessly
he elevates it in the air, and invariably does so when going at his utmost
head, and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by
headsman should stay in the bows from first to last; he should both dart the
interior of the sperm whale's enormous head consists.  Though apparently the
keep shouting at the top of one's compass, while all the other
last, gush after gush of clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees
maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolish and unnecessary.  The
many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and disrated; no wonder that some
many ship owners, whaling is but a losing concern; for it is the harpooneer
most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him.  So that with ease
muscles are strained and half started --what that is none know but those who
obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself
of red wine, shot into the frighted air; and falling back again, ran dripping
of them actually burst their blood-vessels in the boat; no wonder that some
out into view; surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and
own from his mouth, Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for
pilot-boat.
pushes off from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary
rowing, but by repeated loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to
speed.  Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his
sperm whalemen are absent four years with four barrels; no wonder that to
starts to run, the boat-header and harpooneer likewise start to running fore
steersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost oar,
strike the first iron into the fish; for often, in what is called a long
successful, then at the second critical instant, that is, when the whale
that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out of his body how can
that purpose.  Your hat, however, is the most convenient.
that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the running line with
the one known as the harpooneer-oar.  Now it needs a strong, nervous arm to
then they change places; and the headsman, the chief officer of the little
to set an example of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by incredible
turn round on his centre half way, seize his harpoon from the crotch, and
water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for
whale.  No wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen in a body, that out of
with what little strength may remain, he essays to pitch it somehow into the
you expect to find it there when most wanted!  Again, if the dart be




     a steak, ere I sleep!  You, Daggoo!  overboard you go, and cut me one from
     all that would not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object.  Very soon
     thousands on thousands of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan,
.. <p 290 >
.. <p 291 >
.. <p 292 >
a few inches of the sleepers' hearts.  Peering over the side you could just
along the deck, and thrust rattling out of the port-holes.  But by those
and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are
and turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of
as if that capstan were a sideboard.  Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on
best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a
bulwarks.  Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual
by the head to the stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies
clanking links, the vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored.  Tied
conquest, betrayed an unusual but still good-natured excitement.  Such an
dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemed working
deck-table are
defray the current expenses of the war (at least before realizing the
designated by Stubb; comprising the tapering extremity of the body.  About
evinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creature was
forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.  Darkness came on; but
general thing, and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy
his small!  Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a
in him; as if the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was
intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his palate.  A steak,
least so far as could be known on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with
man that is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant butchers over the
midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two lanterns of sperm
morning.  Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had
of affairs.  One small, helping cause of all this liveliness in Stubb, was
official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time the sole management
often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within
oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-head,
orders for securing it for the night, and then handing his lantern to a
proceeds of the voyage), yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers
round a table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every killed
screw.  Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight,
seaman, went his way into the cabin, and did not come forward again until
see them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters,
seems all but miraculous.  How, at such an apparently unassailable surface,
sharks will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship's decks, like hungry dogs
smackingly feasted on its fatness.  The few sleepers below in their bunks were
soon made strangely manifest.  Stubb was a high liver; he was somewhat
the night, which obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two --ship and
the whale of the bigness of a human head.  This particular feat of the shark
they contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the
three lights up and down in the Pequod's main-rigging dimly guided our way;
thus cannibally carving each other's live meat with carving-knives all gilded
till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several more lanterns over the
universal problem of all things.  The mark they thus leave on the whale, may
unwonted bustle was he in that the staid Starbuck, his
were preparing to cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged
whale's flesh that night.  Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications,
whale, seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines
while the other remains standing.  If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at
who have a genuine relish for that particular part of the Sperm Whale
with its black hull close to the vessel's, and seen through the darkness of
yet to be slain; and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship,
you would have thought from the sound on the Pequod's decks, that all hands




     All dention, said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the
     Go to bed berry soon, he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.  Avast!  heave
     Now, cook, said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; Stand just where
     Silence!  How old are you, cook? 'Bout ninety, dey say, he gloomily
-- take it, and taste it.  Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a
.. <p 295 >
.. <p 296 >
Christianity; go on.  No use goin' on; de dam willains will keep a
Don't be tearin' de blubber out your neighbour's mout, I say.  Is not one
I'm coming to, cook.  You must go home and be born over again; you don't
about of the same opinion; so give the benediction, Fleece, and I'll away to
all angel is not'ing more dan de shark well goberned.  Now, look here,
and can't be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is de pint.  You is
answer?  When dis old brack man dies, said the negro slowly, changing his
are you, cook?  What dat do wid de 'teak, said the old black, testily.
belong to the church?  Passed one once in Cape-Down, said the old man
beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook!  And yet you come here, and tell
berry brig mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
berry joosy.  Cook, said Stubb, squaring himself once more; do you
bite off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can't get into de scrouge
bred'ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat whale.
can't hear not'ing at all, no more, for eber and eber.  Upon my soul, I am
cook, and don't know yet how to cook a whale-steak?  rapidly bolting another
country?  he cried, sharply.  No, you didn't, cook; but I'll tell you what
desired position.  Well, said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; I
expect to go to, cook?
fetched Elijah?  And fetch him where?  Up dere, said Fleece, holding his
full, and dare bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get em full, dey wont
goin' ober de Roanoke.  Born in a ferry-boat!  That's queer, too.  But I want
growled, angrily, turning round to depart.  Come back, cook; --here, hand me
hear you den; for den dey sink in de sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and
his shrill voice, and cried -- Cussed fellow-critters!  Kick up de damndest
know how to cook a whale-steak yet.  Bress my soul, if I cook noder one, he
me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?  said Stubb.  Where do you
moment, the old negro muttered, Best cooked 'teak I eber taste; joosy,
mouthful at the last word, so that that morsel seemed a continuation of the
muttered.  And have you lived in this world hard upon one hundred years,
my supper.  Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised
question.  Where were you born, cook? 'Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat,
row as ever you can; fill your dam' bellies 'till dey bust --and den die.
scrougin' and slappin' each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don't hear one word; no
shall now go back to the subject of this steak.  In the first place, how old
shark dood right as toder to dat whale?  And, by Gor, none on you has de right
sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why den you be angel; for
small bellies; so dat de brigness ob de mout is not to swallar wid, but to
steak cooked as it should be?  Take it, I say --holding the tongs towards him
sullenly.  And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
those tongs; --now take that bit of steak there, and tell me if you think that
to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else.  I know some o' you has
to help demselves.  Well done, old Fleece!  cried Stubb, that's
to know what country you were born in, cook?  Didn't I say de Roanoke
to!  I mean when you die, cook.  It's an awful question.  Now what's your
tongs straight over his head, and keeping it there very solemnly.  So, then,
use a-preachin' to such dam g'uttons as you call 'em, till dare bellies is
where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as his
whole air and demeanor, he hisself won't go nowhere; but some bressed angel
will come and fetch him.  Fetch him?  How?  In a coach and four, as they
woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don't blame ye so much for; dat is natur,
you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when you are dead?
you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular attention.




     The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them.  They had a great
     They have such an eatable look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly
     consideration before mentioned: i.  e.  that a man should eat a newly murdered
.. <p 298 >
.. <p 299 >
In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish.  The
Nevertheless, many whalemen have a method of absorbing it into some other
Zogranda, one of their most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for
a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds staring up at the long rows
a whaling vessel --that these men actually lived for several months on the
a young buck with an intelligent looking calf's head before him, is somehow
and every one knows that some young bucks among the epicures, by continually
and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.  Go to the meat-market of
and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he certainly would have been;
and that is adding insult to injury, is it?  Look at your knife-handle,
as the buffalo's (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid
at him, with an Et tu Brute!  expression.  It is not, perhaps, entirely
because the whale is so excessively unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the
blubber.  Among the Dutch whalemen these scraps are called fritters; which,
casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump, whitish
coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that provident Fejee, I say, in
cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious.  We all know how they
dining upon calves' brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their
dish, is his exceeding richness.  He is the great prize ox of the sea, too
eating of him with abhorrence; that appears to result, in some way, from the
fat to be delicately good.  Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating
for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a
hundred feet long, it takes away your appetite.  Only the most unprejudiced
indeed, requires uncommon discrimination.  And that is the reason why
indeed, they greatly resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling
infants, as being exceedingly juicy and nourishing.  And this reminds me
is a common thing for the seamen to dip their ship-biscuit into the huge
jaw?  Cannibals?  who is not a cannibal?  I tell you it will be more tolerable
keep his hands off.  But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized
like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the third
live upon whales, and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil.
lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings), they are
man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a murderer; perhaps he was hung;
month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply a substitute for butter. 
mouldy scraps of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the
much of him; but when you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one
nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy
of dead quadrupeds.  Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal's
of men like Stubb, nowadays partake of
oil-pots and let them fry there awhile.  Many a good supper have I thus made.
one of the saddest sights you can see.  The head looks a sort of reproachfully
own, so as to be able to tell a calf's head from their own heads; which,
pate-de-foie-gras.  But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he?
porpoise grant from the crown.  The fact is, that among his hunters at least,
pyramid of fat.  But the spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is;
something like old Amsterdam housewives' dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
somewhat resembling calves' head, which is quite a dish among some epicures;
substance, and then partaking of it.  In the long try watches of the night it
that certain Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by
the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who
the whale would by all hands be considered a noble dish, were there not so
then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess, in flavor
there, my civilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef,
thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own light.  But no doubt the first
what is that handle made of? --what but the bones of the brother of the very ox




     It was a Saturday night, and such a
     a broad, semicircular line is cut round the hole, the hook is inserted, and
     it is all the time being hoisted higher and higher aloft till its upper end
     scarf, simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck and Stubb, the mates;
     the strongest point anywhere above a ship's deck.  The end of the hawser-like
.. <p 302 >
.. <p 303 >
.. <p 303 >
And now suspended in stages over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates,
Sabbath as followed!  Ex officio professors of Sabbath breaking are all
accomplished swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
all hands swearing occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.
and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels off along the line called the
and is all ready for lowering.  The heavers forward now resume their song,
and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and indeed by that very act itself,
and the huge lower block of the tackles was swung over the whale; to this
and while the one tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the
armed with their long spades, began cutting a hole in the body for the
at last, a swift, startling snap is heard; with a great swash the ship rolls
away the long blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited
block the great blubber hook, weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached.
blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship straining, and
blubber-room.  Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling
blubber.  Now as the blubber envelopes the whale precisely as the rind does an
boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a
considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass.  Into this hole, the
end of the second alternating great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a
every sailor a butcher.  You would have thought we were offering up ten
frosty weather; she trembles, quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to
grapes was swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head,
grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass then cease heaving, and for a
heave of the windlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows; till
hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for what follows.  Whereupon, this
insertion of the hook just above the nearest of the two side-fins.  This done,
is still fast, the long upper strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear,
moment
on her side; every bolt in her starts like the nail-heads of an old house in
one dense crowd at the windlass.  When instantly, the entire ship careens over
or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass sways to and fro as if let down from
orange, so is it stripped off from the body precisely as an orange is
painted green, and which no single man can possibly lift --this vast bunch of
rope winding through these intricacies, was then conducted to the windlass,
scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate, lunging
serpents.  And thus the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering
sight dragging after it the disengaged semicircular end of the first strip of
simultaneously; both whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing, the
slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the short lower part
sometimes stripped by spiralizing it.  For the strain constantly kept up by
swings, else it may box his ears and pitch him headlong overboard.  One of
tackles, among other ponderous things comprising a cluster of blocks generally
the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon called a
the main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in
the sky, and every one present must take good heed to dodge it when it
the sky.  More and more she leans over to the whale, while every gasping
the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling over and over in the water,
thousand red oxen to the sea gods.  In the first place, the enormous cutting
through the main hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the
upwards and backwards from the whale, and the triumphant tackle rises into
whale, the other is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip
whalemen.  The ivory Pequod was turned into what seemed a shamble;




     Haul in the chains!  Let the carcase go
     O man!  in all seasons a temperature of thine own.  But how easy and how
     fowls, whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale.  The
     strong individual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare
.. < chapter lxix 2  THE FUNERAL >
.. <p 306 >
.. <p 307 >
Peter's!  of creatures, how few vast as the whale!
Pole.  Like the great dome of St.  Peter's, and like the great whale, retain,
What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those shuddering, icy seas of
astern!  The vast tackles have now done their duty.  The peeled white body of
azure sky, upon the fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous
better, an Indian poncho slipt over his head, and skirting his extremity.  It
black or speckled.  In life but few of them would have helped the whale, I
breezes, that great mass of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite
contact with other whales; for I have most remarked them in the large,
creatures, that warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as a traveller
every rod that it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods
exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but these, be it observed, are
experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
floating in the sun, and the white spray heaving high against it;
floats more and more away, the water round it torn and splashed by the
found at home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters!  where,
full-grown bulls of the species.  A word or two more concerning this matter
glued in amber.  But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by
has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk.  it is still colossal.  slowly it
hopeless to teach these fine things!  Of erections, how few are domed like St.
in the log -- shoals, rocks, and breakers hereabouts: beware!  And for
in winter would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the whale has
indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real blanket or counterpane; or, still
insatiate sharks, and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming
is by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body, that the whale is enabled to
is, a vengeful ghost survives and hovers over it to scare.  Espied by some
keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all seas, times, and tides.
lungs and warm blood.  Freeze his blood, and he dies.  How wonderful is it
negro in summer.  It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a
not the mightiest whale is free.  Nor is this the end.  Desecrated as the body
obscuring the swarming fowls, nevertheless still shows the white mass
of fowls, augment the murderous din.  For hours and hours from the almost
of the skin or blubber of the whale.  It has already been said, that it is
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found
perspectives.  There's a most doleful and most mocking funeral!  The
sea-vultures all in pious mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in
stationary ship that hideous sight is seen.  Beneath the unclouded and mild
straightway the whale's unharming corpse, with trembling fingers is set down
stript from him in long pieces, called blanket-pieces.  Like most sea-terms,
the beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue, it
the north, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout?  True, other fish are found
then --except after explanation --that this great monster, to whom corporeal
they most piously do pounce.  Oh, horrible vultureism of earth!  from which
this one is very happy and significant.  For the whale is
timid man-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance
vast white headless phantom floats further and further from the ship, and
virtue of interior spaciousness.  Oh, man!  admire and model thyself after the
warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be
ween, if peradventure he had needed it; but upon the banquet of his funeral
whale!  Do thou, too, remain warm among ice.  Do thou, too, live in this world
when seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
without being of it.  Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the
your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very bellies are refrigerators;


     Hand in hand, ship and breeze
     That lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.
--Where away?  Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her
.. < chapter lxxi 2  THE JEROBOAM'S STORY >
.. <p 311 >
.. <p 312 >
Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board, and that Mayhew, her captain,
adhering to the timid quarantine of the land, he peremptorily refused to come
again.  Subject to this, and other the like interruptions now and then, a
an incorruptible sea and air rolling and flowing between; yet conscientiously
are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean, even at considerable
attached, every captain is provided with it.  Thereby, the whale commanders
be made.  Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the
blew on; but the breeze came faster than the ship, and soon the Pequod began
bones of millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was
borne a righteous husband to outstretched, longing arms.  O head!  thou hast
breeze to us!  Better and better, man.  Would now St.  Paul would come along
captain, the stranger in question waved his hand from his boat's stern in
communication.  Preserving an interval of some few yards between itself and
conversation was sustained between the two parties; but at intervals not
could not hope to reach her.  So the signal was set to see what response would
crew remained untainted, and though his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and
deeper midnight of the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on
distances, and with no small facility.  The Pequod's signal was at last
each other, when heaven seemed false to them.  Thou saw'st the murdered mate
erecting himself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow.
flaming ship; heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to
in the Jeroboam's boat, was a man of a singular appearance, even in that wild
into direct contact with the Pequod.  But this did by no means prevent all
main-masthead.  Aye?  Well, now, that's cheering, cried Ahab, suddenly
man!  how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies!  not the
mast-heads proved her a whale-ship.  but as she was so far to windward, and
mind.
parallel to the Pequod, as she heavily forged through the sea (for by this
responded to by the stranger's setting her own; which proved the ship to be
seen enough to split the planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one
ship, the Jeroboam's boat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keep
ships of the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which
shooting by, apparently making a passage to some other ground, the Pequod
side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck's order to accommodate the visiting
signals being collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels
slept by many a sailor's side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives
small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all over his face with freckles, and
smallest atom stirs or lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in
some way ahead; but would be soon skilfully brought to her proper bearings
syllable is thine!  Sail ho!  cried a triumphant voice from the
that way, and to my breezelessness bring his breeze!  O Nature, and O soul of
the
the Jeroboam of Nantucket.  Squaring her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam
thy most familiar home.  Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast
time it blew very fresh), with her main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at
times by the sudden onset of a large rolling wave, the boat would be pushed
to lay them down.  Thou saw'st the locked lovers when leaping from their
to rock.  By and by, through the glass the stranger's boats and manned
token of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary.  It turned out that the
under the Pequod's lee, and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as the
unharmed --while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have
was fearful of infecting the Pequod's company.  For, though himself and boat's
wearing redundant yellow hair.  A long-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a
whaling life where individual notabilities make up all totalities.  He was a
when tossed by pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the
without still another interruption of a very different sort.  Pulling an oar



     Captain, I have just bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for
     Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale's head jogged about very violently, and
     and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of
     that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps
-- Think, think of the blasphemer --dead, and down there! --beware of the
.. <p 315 >
.. <p 316 >
Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his
Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel solemnly warned the captain
Mayhew began a dark story concerning Moby Dick; not, however, without
Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving the Bible.  But when, some year
a broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
about fifty yards.  Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
accompanies the body.  But strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more
against attacking the white whale, in case the monster should be seen; in his
almost as frequent as any.  Sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is
archangel nature seemed to warrant.  When this interlude was over, Captain
archangel's denunciations and forewarnings, Macey succeeded in persuading
being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity, despite all the
blasphemer's end!  Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew,
chance of encountering them in the four oceans.  Thus, most letters never
chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed.  He became a
delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, depends upon the mere
disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of
divinity.  Now, while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat's bow, and
event clothed the archangel with added influence; because his credulous
five men to man his boat.  With them he pushed off; and, after
forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his
frequent interruptions from Gabriel, whenever his name was mentioned, and
gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the
his feet, glaring
instances than one, when the body has been recovered, not a single mark of
main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling
much weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at last
nameless terror to the ship.  Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put
not long left home, when upon speaking a whale-ship, her people were
oarsman's head; but the mate for ever sank.  It is well to parenthesize here,
one of thy officers, if I mistake not.  Starbuck, look over the bag.  Every
only making a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have
or three years or more.  Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand.  It
or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads, Macey,
piercing shriek -- The vial!  the vial!  Gabriel called off the
reach their mark; and many are only received after attaining an age of two
reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made.
succeeded in getting one iron fast.  Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
such questions to him, that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen.  Next instant,
terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale.  This terrible
the chief mate, burned with ardor to encounter him; and the captain himself
the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.  It seemed that the Jeroboam had
the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried from the ship.  Raising a
the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily into the air,
thigh-board, in which the headsman stands, is torn from its place and
thus annihilated; oftener the boat's bow is knocked off, or the
upon the old man, and vehemently exclaimed, with downward pointed finger
upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo!
violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.  The whole calamity, with
whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships, whose
whether he intended to hunt the White Whale, if opportunity should offer.  To
which Ahab answered -- Aye.  Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to
with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations


     as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship, suddenly rose to view under
     get him to swap away his silver watch, or his soul, or something of that
.. <p 323 >
.. <p 324 >
But I sometimes think he'll charm the ship to no good at last.  I don't half
Flask with lance for lance; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle
I remember some such story as you were telling, said Flask, when at last the
Stubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so
Whale's body, rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinking
Whale's head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right
Whale's on the larboard; did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can never
a peculiar motion of both hands -- Aye, will I!  Flask, I take that Fedallah to
advance they sought to gain.  And they stuck to it till they did gain it;
after that White Whale, and the devil there is trying to come round him, and
afterwards capsize?  Why not?  I don't know, but I heard that gamboge
always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots.  He sleeps in his
at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains
be the devil in disguise.  Do you believe that cock and bull story about his
beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free
boots, don't he?  He hasn't got any hammock; but I've seen him lay of nights
bulwarks, and no one by; look down there, Flask --pointing into the sea with
but if ever I get a chance of a dark night, and he standing hard by the
carved into a snake's head, Stubb?  Sink him!  I never look at him at all;
coiled away in his pocket, I guess.  Blast him!  now that I think of it, he's
coils it down, do ye see, in the eye of the rigging.  What's the old man
contending strain threatened to take them under.  But it was only a few feet
course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him, so
devilish easy and gentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at
frightful roll and vomit, he turned upon his back a corpse.  While the two
getting the mass in readiness for towing, some conversation ensued between
ghost of a Fedallah saying so, and he seems to know all about ships' charms.
governor, "What business is that of yours," says the devil, getting mad, --"I
have so much to do with him for?  Striking up a swap or a bargain, I
having been stowed away on board ship?  He's the devil, I say.  The reason why
headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes, and in other ways
her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging off its drippings, that
him, I'll eat this whale in one mouthful.  But look sharp-- aint you all ready
home.  Well, he was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted.  The devil,
ignoble a leviathan.  Wants with it?  said Flask, coiling some spare line in
in a coil of rigging.  No doubt, and it's because of his cursed tail; he
is a curious chap, and a wicked one, I tell ye.  Why, they say as how he
it
like that chap, Stubb.  Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort of
skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?  I don't know, Flask, but the devil
sort, and then he'll surrender Moby Dick.  Pooh!  Stubb, you are
suppose.  Bargain? --about what?  Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent
switching his hoofs, up and says, "I want John." "What for?" says the old
that poured from the smitten rock.  At last his spout grew thick, and with a
that they performed a complete circuit.  Meantime, they hauled more and more
the boat's bow, did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm
the devil didn't give John the Asiatic cholera before he got through with
the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water, while the whale
them.  I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard, said
there?  Well, then, pull ahead, and let's get the whale alongside.  I think
to fly.  But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship, but I
upon their lines, till close flanking him on both sides, Stubb answered
want to use him." "Take him," says the governor --and by the Lord, Flask, if
went a sauntering into the old flag-ship once, switching his tail about
went, while the multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm
when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like lightning along the keel,
you don't see his tail, is because he tucks it up out of sight; he carries



     Here, now, are
     grey-headed whale.  Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads
     the Right Whale are by far the most noteworthy.  They are the only whales
-- namely, the two most important organs, the eye and the ear.
.. < chapter lxxiv 7  THE SPERM WHALE'S HEAD--CONTRASTED VIEW >
.. <p 327 >
.. <p 327 >
.. <p 328 >
.. <p 329 >
Both are massive enough in all conscience; but there is a certain mathematical
But with the whale, these two sashes are separately inserted, making two
Far back on the side of the head, and low down, near the angle of either
Moreover, while in most other animals that I can now think of, the eyes are so
ahead, no more than he can one exactly astern.  in a word, the position of
all the known varieties of the whale.  As the external difference between them
and large experience.  In short, he is what the fishermen technically call a
backs, so to speak; but, at the same time, also, two fronts (side fronts):
behind it.  If your bitterest foe were walking straight towards you, with
calmly eyeing the right whale's head, and ever and anon glancing from the deep
dagger uplifted in broad day, you would not be able to see him, any more
dignity.  In the present instance, too, this dignity is heightened by the
distinct windows, but sadly impairing the view.  This peculiarity of the
effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of solid head, which
first place, you are struck by the general contrast between these heads.
for what is it that makes the front of a man --what, indeed, but his eyes?
hanging from the Pequod's side; and as we may freely go from one to the
involuntarily yield the immense superiority to him, in point of pervading
is mainly observable in their heads; and as a head of each is this moment
lines in his own hand.  And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee
more character in the Sperm Whale's head.  As you behold it, you
occupied his shadow; while, if the Parsee's shadow was there at all it seemed
only to blend with, and lengthen Ahab's.  As the crew toiled on, Laplandish
organ imparts.  The whale, therefore, must see one distinct picture on this
other, by merely stepping across the deck: --where, I should like to know,
out on the world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window.
pepper and salt color of his head at the summit, giving token of advanced age
picture and not two to the brain; the peculiar position of the whale's eyes,
planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power, so as to produce one
profound darkness and nothingness to him.  Man may, in effect, be said to look
puzzling question might be started concerning
regularly hunted by man.  To the Nantucketer, they present the two extremes of
remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes.  A curious and most
side, and another distinct picture on that side; while all between must be
speculations were bandied among them, concerning all these passing things.
symmetry in the Sperm Whale's which the Right Whale's sadly lacks.  There is
than if he were stealing upon you from behind.  In a word, you would have two
the whale's eyes corresponds to that of a man's ears; and you may fancy, for
this, of course, must wholly separate the impressions which each independent
to the magnitude of the head.  Now, from this peculiar sideway position of the
together our own.  Of the grand order of folio leviathans, the Sperm Whale and
towers between them like a great mountain separating two lakes in valleys;
two great whales, laying their heads together; let us join them, and lay
vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight; and about thirty more
whale's eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery; and to be
whale's eyes, it is plain that he can never see an object which is exactly
whale's jaw, if you narrowly search, you will at last see a lashless eye,
which you would fancy to be a young colt's eye; so out of all proportion is it
will you obtain a better chance to study practical cetology than here?  In the
wrinkles there to the
your ears.  You would find that you could only command some thirty degrees of
yourself, how it would fare with you, did you sideways survey objects through


     Crossing the
     unless, indeed, your fancy has been fixed by the technical term crown also
--this green, barnacled thing, which the Greenlanders call the crown, and
.. < chapter lxxv 17  THE RIGHT WHALE'S HEAD--CONTRASTED VIEW >
.. <p 331 >
.. <p 331 >
.. <p 332 >
Indian wigwam.  Good Lord!  is this the road that Jonah went?  The roof is
Over this lip, as over a slippery threshold, we now slide into the mouth.
Upon my word were I at Mackinaw, I should take this to be the inside of an
a sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more.  A great
about a foot across.  Probably the mother during an important interval was
about twelve feet high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle, as if there were a
and furnishing a supply of
at that hanging lower lip!  what a huge sulk and pout is there!  a sulk and
bestowed upon it; in which case you will take great interest in thinking how
bird's nest in its crotch.  At any rate, when you watch those live crabs that
broad view, the Right Whale's head bears a rather inelegant resemblance to a
crown bone, form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily
crown has been put together for him in this marvellous manner.  But if this
curious articles, including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles to
deck, let us now have a good long look at the Right Whale's head.  As in
eye upon this strange, crested, comb-like incrustation on the top of the mass
general shape the noble Sperm Whale's head may be compared to a Roman
gigantic galliot-toed shoe.  Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager
houses.
jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs, and piled away like joists for building
likened its shape to that of a shoemaker's last.  And in this same last or
mentioned.  The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres, through
much worn down, but undecayed; nor filled after our artificial fashion.  The
nestle here on this bonnet, such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you;
on this, you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak, with a
pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.  The fissure is
point of view.  If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped
pout, by carpenter's measurement, about twenty feet long and five feet deep;
regular ridge-pole there; while these ribbed, arched, hairy sides, present us
riding-whips.  With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it
sailing down the Peruvian coast, when earthquakes caused the beach to gape.
shoe, that old woman of the nursery tale, with the swarming brood, might
spiracles, the apertures in its sounding-board.  Then, again, if you fix your
spout-holes, you would take the whole head for an enormous bass-viol, and
that hard white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of
the Southern fishers the bonnet of the Right Whale; fixing your eyes solely
the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts, and a tackle being rigged from aloft,
the small fish, when open-mouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding
there are certain curious marks, curves, hollows, and ridges, whereby some
these
they drag out these teeth, as Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of
this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the sea, whose green
three hundred on a side, which depending from the upper part of the head or
time.  In the central blinds of bone, as they stand in their natural order,
to drawing teeth.  With a keen cutting-spade, Queequeg lances the gums; then
to this great head it begins to assume different aspects, according to your
very comfortably be lodged, she and all her progeny.  But as you come nearer
war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so broadly rounded); so, at a
were an anchor; and when the proper time comes --some few days after the other
whale be a king, he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem.  Look
whalemen calculate
which the Right Whale strains the water, and in whose intricacies he retains
wild wood-lands.  There are generally forty-two teeth in all; in old whales,
with those wondrous, half vertical, scimetar-shaped slats of whale-bone, say
work --Queequeg, Daggoo, and Tashtego, being all accomplished dentists, are set

     and not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the
.. <p 335 >
.. <p 336 >
Furthermore, you are now to consider that only in the extreme, lower, backward
Indiamen chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks, what do
Whale were paved with horses' hoofs.  I do not think that any sensation lurks
Whale, the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the
and be ready to abide by this; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage
arm, impotently rebounds from it.  It is as though the forehead of the Sperm
as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them, capable,
at will, of distension or contraction; and as the Sperm Whale, as far as I
at.  But supplementary to this, it has hypothetically occurred to me, that
atmospheric distension and contraction.  If this be so, fancy the
backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket which
boneless toughness,  inestimable by any man who has not handled it.  The
braining feats; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity,
but not the less true events, perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded
contact, any merely hard substance,
crowbars.  By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive
difference: about the head this envelope, though not so thick, is of a
entirely under your chin.  Moreover you observe that the whale has no external
enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide.  That bravely and uninjured
estimated as piled wood is --by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as
expansive monster; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable
full cranial development.  So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one
history.  You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm
impregnable, uninjurable wall, and this most buoyant thing within; there
in it.  Bethink yourself also of another thing.  When two large, loaded
inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the
irresistibleness of that might, to which the most impalpable and destructive
know, has no such provision in him; considering, too, the otherwise
like iron or wood.  No, they hold there a large, round wad of tow and cork,
lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and
nose; and that what nose he has --his spout hole --is on the top of his head;
of all elements contributes.  Now, mark.  Unerringly impelling this dead,
of his head; it has hypothetically occurred to me, I say, that those mystical
perceived that the front of the Sperm Whale's head is a dead, blind wall,
previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body of the
provincials then?  What befel the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess's
receives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe that the mouth is entirely
severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance darted by the strongest human
sloping part of the front of the head, is there the slightest vestige of bone;
specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this
substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy.  In some
surface, and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water; considering
swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life, only to be adequately
takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron
the most delicate oil; yet, you are now to be apprised of the nature of the
the sailors do?  They do not suspend between them, at the point of coming
the smallest insect.  So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the
the unobstructed elasticity of its envelop; considering the unique interior
thing for salamander giants only to encounter; how small the chances for the
third of his entire length from the front.  Wherefore, you must now have
through the Isthmus of Darien, and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific, you
under the head, much in the same way, indeed, as though your own mouth were
unsuspected connexion with the outer air, so as to be susceptible to
wad.  Finally, though, as will soon be revealed, its contents partly comprise
water; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerably
whale, as the rind wraps an orange.  Just so with the head; but with this
without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever.
would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow.  For unless you own the whale,
you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth.  But clear Truth is a
you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one




     Nimble as a cat, Tashtego
     dexterously he lands on the summit of the head.  There --still high elevated
     hoisted Tun.  He has carried with him a light tackle called a whip,
     very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house, sounding the
.. < chapter lxxviii 2  CISTERN AND BUCKETS >
.. <p 340 >
.. <p 341 >
Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous depth to which
Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handed
Securing this block, so that it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one
Turkish Muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower.  A
a dairy-maid's pail of new milk.  Carefully lowered from its height, the
a very long pole.  Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward
above the rest of the company, to whom he vivaciously cries --he seems some
almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom.  Meantime,
at once a queer accident happened.  Whether it was that Tashtego, that wild
attached to one end of the whip; while the other end, being stretched across
clean out of sight!  Man overboard!  cried Daggoo, who amid the general
clearing the whip --which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles --a
consisting of only two parts, travelling through a single-sheaved block.
consternation first came to his senses.  Swing the bucket this way!  and
down, come down!  yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but
end of the rope, till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck.  Then,
entire strain now depended, seemed every instant to be on the point of giving
full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand, and quickly emptied
guides the bucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving the
hand-over-hand, down the other part, the Indian drops through the air, till
harder, and deeper and deeper into the Tun, until some twenty feet of the
has to ram his long pole harder and
he had sunk.  At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, was
hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head; or whether the place
in this way; several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all
into a large tub.  Then re-mounting aloft, it again goes through the same
is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, precisely like a well-bucket, has been
lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea, as if
mounts aloft; and without altering his erect posture, runs straight out upon
on the whip itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head,
or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up --my God!  poor Tashtego --like the twin
pole have gone down.  Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time
putting one foot into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold
reciprocating bucket in a veritable well, dropped head-foremost down into
round until the deep cistern will yield no more.  Towards the end, Tashtego
sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable horror of all, one of
shook as if smitten by an iceberg.  The one remaining hook, upon which the
short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him, he diligently searches for
that moment seized with some momentous idea; whereas it was only the poor
the bucket within grasp of the Indian, to whom another person has reached up
the deck, is there held by two or three alert hands.  These last now hoist
the overhanging main-yard-arm, to the part where it exactly projects over the
the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun.  In this business he proceeds
the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out, and with a vast
there was a terrible tumult.  Looking over the side, they saw the before
this great Tun of Heidelburgh, and with a horrible oily gurgling, went
vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, till the drunk ship reeled and
walls to find where the gold is masoned in.  By the time this cautious search
was exactly, there is no telling now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth
way; an event still more likely from the violent motions of the head.  Come
where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; or whether the Evil One himself
word to the seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all bubbling like
would have it to fall out so, without stating his particular reasons; how it



     To scan the lines of his face, or feel
     been impertinent.  As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast
     seem almost as hopeful as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the
--the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seeking honey in the crotch
.. < chapter lxxix 14  THE PRAIRE >
.. <p 343 >
.. <p 343 >
.. <p 344 >
But in the great Sperm Whale, this high and mighty god-like dignity inherent
Dome of the Pantheon.  Still, in that famous work of his, Lavater not only
Phidias's marble Jove, and what a sorry remainder!  Nevertheless, Leviathan
Physiognomically regarded, the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature.  He has
Physiognomist or Phrenologist has as yet undertaken.  Such an enterprise would
Rock of Gibraltar, or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the
Shakespeare's or Melancthon's rise so high, and descend so low, that the eyes
affect the countenance of the whale.  For as in landscape gardening, a spire,
alpine land lying along the snow line.  Few are the foreheads which like
beadle on his throne.  In some particulars, perhaps, the most imposing
blemish at all.  Nay, it is an added grandeur.  A nose to the whale would have
characteristics of other beings than man.  Therefore, though I am but ill
creatures, nay in man himself, very often the brow is but a mere strip of
cupola, monument, or tower of some sort, is deemed almost indispensable to
curled brow of the bull has a touch of the grand in it.  Pushing heavy cannon
disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching the phrenological
east when troubled with the morning.  in the repose of the pasture, the
features; and since it perhaps
have likewise fallen into Plato's honey head, and sweetly perished there?
head in your jolly-boat, your noble conceptions of him are never insulted by
horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells in detail upon the
in the brow is so immensely amplified, that gazing on it, in that full front
in the forehead's wrinkles, you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending
is of so mighty a magnitude, all his proportions are so stately, that the
it was.  Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very precious
modifications of expression discernible therein.  Nor have Gall and his
most modifies and finally controls their combined expression; hence it would
mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German emperors to
no proper nose.  And since the nose is the central and most conspicuous of the
obstetrics on the run, as you may say.  Yes, it was a running delivery, so
of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of it, that leaning too far
of his head.  This aspect is sublime.  In thought a fine human brow is like the
over, it sucked him in, so that he died embalmed.  How many, think ye,
performing his agile
perishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant
physiognomical view to be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front
qualified for a pioneer, in the application of these two semi-sciences to the
same deficiency which in the sculptured Jove were hideous, in him is no
sanctum sanctorum of the whale.  Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled
seem that its entire absence, as an external appendage, must very largely
so often will insist upon obtruding even when beholding the mightiest royal
spermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamber and
the bumps on the head of this Leviathan; this is a thing which no
the completion of the scene; so no face can be physiognomically in keeping
the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled.  A pestilent conceit, which
their decrees.  It signifies God: done this day by my hand.  But in most
themselves seem clear, eternal, tideless mountain lakes; and all above them
there to drink, as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer.
treats of the various faces of men, but also attentively studies the faces of
up mountain defiles, the elephant's brow is majestic.  Human or animal, the
view, you feel the Deity and the dread powers
whale, I will do my endeavor.  I try all things; I achieve what I can.
without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose.  Dash the nose from


     The predestinated day
     What has he in his hand there?  cried Starbuck, pointing to something
.. < chapter lxxxi 21  THE PEQUOD MEETS THE VIRGIN >
.. <p 348 >
.. <p 348 >
.. <p 349 >
Bremen.  At one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the Dutch and
Germans are now among the least; but here and there at very wide intervals of
Pacific.  For some reason, the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her
Stubb, no, no, it's a coffee-pot, Mr. Starbuck; he's coming off to make
Under all these circumstances, would it be unreasonable to survey and map
absolutely undeveloped skulls.  But the curious external resemblance, I take
along with you, cried Flask, it's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.  He's out
arrived, and we duly met the ship Jungfrau, Derick De Deer, master, of
august hump, if I mistake not, rises over one of the larger vertebrae, and
by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his spinal cord.  But leaving this
canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous substance -- the spinal
capacity.  Now, of course, this
contradict the old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle, yet sometimes
cord --as the brain; and directly communicates with the brain.  And what is
cord remains of an undecreasing girth, almost equal to that of the brain.
dropping a boat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatiently standing
figure with the base downwards.  As it passes through the remaining vertebrae
flag which I fling half out to the world.  Apply this spinal branch of
found betokened in his backbone.  I would rather feel your spine than your
hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists, I would merely assume the
important thing in not pushing their investigations from the cerebellum
in the bows instead of the stern.
indomitable, you will yet have reason to know.
indomitableness in the Sperm Whale.  And that the great monster is
is, therefore, in some sort, the outer convex mould of it.  From its relative
it the Germans were not the first men to perceive.  A foreign friend once
latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet with their flag in the
measure ten inches across, being eight in height, and of a triangular
most exalted potency is.  But if from the comparative dimensions of the
neck-vertebra; and in that vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will
noble soul.  I rejoice in my spine, as in the firm audacious staff of that
of him? --that's his boiling water.  Oh!  he's all right, is the Yarman.  Go
of oil, and has come a-begging.  However curious it may seem for an oil-ship
out the whale's spine phrenologically?  For, viewed in this light, the
phrenology to the Sperm Whale.  His cranial cavity is continuous with the first
pointed it out to me, in the skeleton of a foe he had slain, and with the
prow of his canoe.  Now, I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an
quadruped's spine, you will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebrae
respects.  While yet some distance from the Pequod, she rounded to, and
situation then, I should call this high hump the organ of firmness or
skull, whoever you are.  A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and
spinal theory for a moment, in reference to the sperm whale's hump.  This
still more, for many feet after emerging from the brain's cavity, the spinal
such a thing really happens; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer
the canal tapers in size, but for a considerable distance remains of large
then I have another idea for you.  If you attentively regard almost any
through the spinal canal.  For I believe that much of a man's character will be
to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls, all bearing rudimental resemblance
to be borrowing oil on the whale-ground, and however much it may invertedly
to the skull proper.  It is a German conceit, that the vertebrae are
us our coffee, is the Yarman; don't you see that big tin can there alongside
vertebrae of which he was inlaying, in a sort of basso-relievo, the beaked
wavingly held by the German.  Impossible! --a lamp-feeder!  Not that, said
whale's proper brain, you deem it incapable of being adequately charted,
wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is more than compensated
yourself the truest, though not the most exhilarating conception of what the




     It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight.  The whale was now
     There she slides, now!  Hurrah for the white-ash breeze!  Down with the
     do, do! --What's that Yarman about now?  At this moment Derick was in the act
     making affrighted broken circles in the air, vainly striving to escape the
-- It's against my religion to get mad; but I'd like to eat that villanous
-- What a hump --Oh, do pile on the beef --lays like a log!  Oh!  my lads, do
--don't oh, don't! -- see that Yarman --Oh!  won't ye pull for your duff, my
.. <p 352 >
.. <p 353 >
Yarman --Pull--won't ye?  Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye?  Do ye love
Yarman!  Sail over him!  But so decided an original start had Derick had,
and rather than be thus foiled of his game, Derick chose to hazard what to
backward toss.  The unmannerly Dutch dogger!  cried Stubb.  Pull now,
barbs; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer, their three
billow that he broke, he spasmodically sank in the sea, or sideways rolled
boat's bottom --and by the Lord, the mast there's budding.  This won't do,
boys.  Look at that Yarman!  The short and long of it is, men, will ye spit
brandy?  A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man.  Come, why don't some of
capsizing, and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage; --that was a
d'ye say, Tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty
don't budge an inch --we're becalmed.  Halloo, here's grass growing in the
fire or not?  Oh!  see the suds he makes!  cried Flask, dancing up and down
for ever escape.  But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke,
free his white-ash, and while, in consequence, Derick's boat was nigh to
god-dam, --cried the Indian.  Fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of
going head out, and sending his spout before him in a continual tormented
good time for Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask.  With a shout, they took a mortal
hand, now to that, he yawed in his faltering flight, and still at every
him must have seemed a most unusually long dart, ere the last chance would
jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of fright.  Now to this
known her fear; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea, was chained
lads --such a sog!  such a sogger!  Don't ye love sperm?  There goes three
men, like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils.  What
more, and all four boats were diagonically in the whale's immediate wake,
muffins --oh, do, do spring --he's a hundred barreler --don't lose him now
of pitching his lamp-feeder at the advancing boats, and also his oil-can;
of the headsman when drawing near to his prey, the three mates stood up
perhaps with the double view of retarding his rivals' way, and at the same
pieces for the honor of old Gay-head?  What d'ye say?  I say, pull like
piratical hawks.  But the bird has a voice, and with plaintive cries will make
pitiable; while still, in his amazing bulk, portcullis jaw, and omnipotent
proudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cry of,
race, had not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught
so disposed, momentarily neared him.  In that fine, loose, chivalrous attitude
spring --slap-jacks and quohogs for supper, you know, my lads --baked clams and
start forwards, and slantingly ranged up on the German's quarter.  An instant
tail, there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied.  Seeing now
than all three tigers --Queequeg, Tashtego, Daggoo -- instinctively sprang to
that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod's boats the advantage,
that spite of all their gallantry, he would have proved the victor in this
the German, the Pequod's three boats now began ranging almost abreast; and,
the blade of his midship oarsman.  While this clumsy lubber was striving to
their feet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointed their
thousand dollars, men! --a bank! --a whole bank!  The bank of England! --Oh, do,
through his spiracle, and this made the sight of him unspeakably
time economically accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the
towards the sky his one beating fin.  So have I seen a bird with clipped wing,
up and enchanted in him; he had no voice, save that choking respiration
while stretching from them, on both sides, was the foaming swell that he made.
ye burst a blood-vessel?  Who's that been dropping an anchor overboard --we


     A nice spot, cried Flask; just let me prick him there once.  Avast!
     that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period; even
.. <p 356 >
.. <p 357 >
At the instant of the dart an ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and
Soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship, the body showed
Starbuck's orders, lines were secured to it at different points, so that ere
Still rolling in his blood, at last he partially disclosed a strangely
animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins,
arm, and his blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in order to
as in a drought a river will flow, whose source is in the well-springs of
because no vital part of him had thus far been struck.  His life, as they
been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back all dripping into the
begun upon his whole arterial system; and when this is heightened by the
blood, with swift fury blindly darted at the craft, bespattering them and
boats, and soon the whale broke water within two ship's lengths of the
cried Starbuck, there's no need of that!  But humane Starbuck was too late.
discolored bunch or protuberance, the size of a bushel, low down on the flank.
downward strain at the bows, the boats gave a sudden bounce upwards, as a
extraordinary pressure of water at a great distance below the surface, his
far-off and undiscernible hills.  Even now, when the boats pulled upon this
felt them in his seat.  The next moment, relieved in a great part from the
flukes, and the lances were darted into him, they were followed by steady
from some mighty fountain, and with half-stifled melancholy gurglings the
goaded by it into more than sufferable anguish, the whale now spouting thick
he by loss of blood, that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he had
his head!  Stand by, men; he stirs, cried Starbuck, as the three lines
hunters.  His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion.  In most land
in certain directions.  Not so with the whale; one of whose peculiarities it
into the sea.  Haul in!  Haul in!  cried Starbuck again; he's rising.  The
is, to have an entire nonvalvular structure of the blood-vessels, so that
its affrighted moisture into the air.  From this last vent no blood yet came,
jets from the new made wound, which kept continually playing, while the
last expiring spout.  As when by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off
life may be said to pour from him in incessant streams.  Yet so vast is the
light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men, and also to illuminate
lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand's breadth could have
long every boat was a buoy; the sunken whale being suspended a few inches
made; lay panting on his side, impotently flapped with his stumped fin,
magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale, so that every oarsman
marring the bows.  It was his death stroke.  For, by this time, so spent was
natural spout-hole in his head was only at intervals, however rapid, sending
of the whale.
ordinarily submerged, was plainly revealed.  His eyes, or rather the places
pitiable to see.  but pity there was none.  For all his old age, and his one
quantity of blood in him, and so distant and numerous its interior fountains,
secrets of his belly; lay like a log, and died.  It was most piteous, that
significantly call it, was untouched.  As the boats now more closely
small ice-field will, when a dense herd of white bears are scared from it
spray-column lowers and lowers to the ground --so the last long dying spout
suddenly vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards to them, as by
surrounded him, the whole upper part of his form, with much of it that is
symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled.  Immediately, by
the knot-holes of the noblest oaks when prostrate, so from the points which
the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to all.
the whale's eyes had once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly
their glorying crews all over with showers of gore, capsizing Flask's boat and
then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world; turned up the white
whale, and perilously drew over his swaying
when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon, a deadly drain is at once
where his eyes had been, were beheld.  As strange misgrown masses gather in
whereby when wounded, the blood is in some degree at least instantly shut off


     There are some
     Whale gives token of sinking, they fasten buoys to him, with plenty of
.. < chapter lxxxii 24  THE HONOR AND GLORY OF WHALING >
.. <p 359 >
.. <p 360 >
.. <p 361 >
Dericks, my friend.
Jungfrau was again lowering her boats; though the only spout in sight was
Leviathan was slain at the very first dart.  And let no man doubt this Arkite
Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whaleman; and to the eternal honor of
Perseus, the prince of whalemen, intrepidly advancing, harpooned the monster,
after her four young keels, and thus they all disappeared far to leeward,
and delivered and married the maid.  It was an admirable artistic exploit,
and the Dragon; which dragon I maintain to have been a whale; for in many
and though
animal balloon.  A line-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then.  In
because of its incredible power of swimming.  Nevertheless, the Fin-Back's
belong, though but subordinately, to so emblazoned a fraternity.  The gallant
body that a cry was heard from the Pequod's mast-heads, announcing that the
bones of the monster that Perseus slew.  When the Romans took Joppa, the same
deep.  Any man may kill a snake, but only a Perseus, a St.  George, a Coffin,
demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts, who one way or other have shed
distinction upon it, I am transported with the reflection that I myself
dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researches up to the very
enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the true method.  The more I
from the glory of the exploit had St.  George but encountered a crawling
generated in him; he swells to a prodigious magnitude; becomes a sort of
have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale.  Let not the modern
honorableness and antiquity; and especially when I find so many great
how the lovely Andromeda, the daughter of a king, was tied to a rock on the
men's lamp-feeders.  Every one knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda;
more buoyant than in life.  But the reason of this is obvious.  Gases are
not killed with any sordid intent.  Those were the knightly days of our
often mistaken for it.  And consequently Derick and all his host were now in
old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely jumbled together, and often
our calling be it said, that the first whale attacked by our brotherhood was
paintings of this scene mislead us; for though the creature encountered by
profession, when we only bore arms to succor the distressed, and not to fill
rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the present day; inasmuch as this
reptile of the land, instead of doing battle with the great monster of the
rope; so that when the body has gone down, they know where to look for it
sea-coast, and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off,
set sail.  Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda --indeed, by some
skeleton was carried to Italy in triumph.  What seems most singular and
spout is so similar to the Sperm Whale's, that by unskilful fishermen it is
spring-head of it, so much the more am I impressed with its great
stand for each other.  Thou art as a lion of the waters, and as a dragon of
still in bold, hopeful chase.  Oh!  many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the
story; for in the ancient Joppa, now Jaffa, on the Syrian coast, in one of
suggestively important in this story, is this: it was from Joppa that Jonah
supposed to be indirectly derived from it --is that famous story of St.  George
that of a Fin-Back, belonging to the species of uncapturable whales,
that valiant whaleman of old is vaguely represented of a griffin-like shape,
the Pagan temples, there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale,
the Shore Whaling, on soundings, among the Bays of New Zealand, when a Right
the battle is depicted on land and the saint on horseback, yet considering
the great ignorance of those times, when the true form of the whale was
the sea, saith ezekiel; hereby, plainly meaning a whale; in truth, some
valiant chase of this unnearable brute.  The Virgin crowding all sail, made
versions of the Bible use that word itself.  Besides, it would much subtract
when it shall have ascended again.  It was not long after the sinking of the
which the city's legends and all the inhabitants asserted to be the identical




     A penny roll would choke him; his swallow is so very small.  But, to this,
     Bishop Jebb's anticipative answer is ready.  It is not necessary, hints the
     To make them run easily and swiftly,
     and, I would add, possibly called The Whale, as some craft are nowadays
.. < chapter lxxxiv 2  PITCHPOLING >
.. <p 364 >
.. <p 365 >
Besides, it has been divined by other continental commentators, that when
Bishop, that we consider Jonah as tombed in the whale's belly, but as
Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the honor of the discovery of that
Jonah merely meant a life-preserver --an inflated bag of wind --which the
Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship, he straightway effected his
Mosque built in honor of Jonah, in which mosque was a miraculous lamp that
Portuguese Catholic priest, this very idea of Jonah's going to Nineveh via
Possibly, too, Jonah might have ensconced himself in a hollow tooth; but, on
Russian campaign turned their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them.
Sag-Harbor (he went by that name) urged for his want of faith in this matter
Sag-Harbor, therefore, seems worsted all round.  But he had still another
Tigris, very much more than three days' journey across from the nearest point
abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy.  For by a
accommodate a couple of whist tables, and comfortably seat all the players.
ago, an English traveller in old Harris's Voyages, speaks of a Turkish
and the whale's gastric juices.  But this objection likewise falls to the
another passage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, such a supposition would
any whale to swim in.  Besides, this idea of Jonah's weathering the Cape of
bottom.  Nor is it to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm, it
burnt without any oil.
christened the Shark, the Gull, the Eagle.  Nor have there been wanting
devoutly believe in the historical story of Jonah.  And some three centuries
endangered prophet swam to, and so was saved from a watery doom.  Poor
enough in the good Bishop.  For truly, the Right Whale's mouth would
escape to another vessel near by, some vessel with a whale for a figure-head;
evinced his foolish pride of reason --a thing still more reprehensible in
great headland from Bartholomew Diaz, its reputed discoverer, and so make
ground, because a German exegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge
him, seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up from
in the floating body of a dead whale -- even as the French soldiers in the
involve the complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days, not to
learned exegetists who have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of
might have carried him round by the way of the Cape of Good Hope.  But not to
miracle.  And so it was.  Besides, to this day, the highly enlightened Turks
modern history a liar.  But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only
of the Mediterranean coast.  How is that?  But was there no other way for the
of the prophet, was something obscurely in reference to his incarcerated body
old-fashioned Bibles, embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of
only true with respect to a species of the Leviathan (the Right Whale, and
reason for his want of faith.  It was this, if I remember right: Jonah was
second thoughts, the Right Whale is toothless.  Another reason which
speak of the Tigris waters, near the site of Nineveh, being too shallow for
speak of the passage through the whole length of the Mediterranean, and
swallowed by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea, and after three days he was
temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth.  And this seems reasonable
the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a signal magnification of the general
the axles of carriages are anointed; and for much the same purpose, some
the sun and the sea.  I say it only shows his foolish, impious pride, and
the varieties of that order), concerning which the fishermen have this saying,
vomited up somewhere within three days' journey of Nineveh, a city on the
whale to land the prophet within that short distance of Nineveh?  Yes.  He
whalers perform an analogous operation upon their boat; they grease the
which represented Jonah's whale with two spouts in his head --a peculiarity


     That for six thousand years --and no one
),
.. < chapter lxxxv 11  THE FOUNTAIN >
.. <p 367 >
.. <p 368 >
.. <p 369 >
Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of their gills, the finny tribes
Now, if after he fetches a few
again, he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again, to a minute.
all his other unmolested risings.  Say he stays eleven minutes, and jets
any creature breathing is only a function indispensable to vitality, inasmuch
are told, will he finally go down to stay out his full term below.  Remark,
as it withdraws from the air a certain element, which being subsequently
be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fifteen and a quarter
blood in a man could be aerated with one breath, he might then seal up his
breath, or so much as in any way inhaling a particle of air; for, remember,
breathe through his mouth, for, in his ordinary attitude, the Sperm Whale's
breaths you alarm him, so that he sounds, he will be always dodging up again
brought into contact with the blood imparts to the blood its vivifying
centuries back, thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain
crossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply of drink for future use
deep, as with so many sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some
descending for good?  How obvious is it, too, that this necessity for the
for his periodical visits to the upper world.  But he cannot in any degree
he has no gills.  How is this?  Between his ribs and on each side of his spine
he is supplied with a remarkable involved Cretan labyrinth of vermicelli-like
his full hour and more (when at the bottom) without drawing a single
his spiracle alone; and this is on the top of his head.  If I say, that in
however, that in different individuals these rates are different; but in any
in general breathe the air which at all times is combined with the element in
in its four supplementary stomachs.  The anatomical fact of this labyrinth
is indisputable; and that the supposition founded upon it is reasonable and
it should still remain a problem, whether these spoutings are, after all,
knows how many millions of ages before --the great whales should have been
minutes past one o'clock P. M.  of this sixteenth day of December, A. D.
more, his windpipe has no connexion with his mouth.  No, he breathes through
mouth is buried at least eight feet beneath the surface; and what is still
nostrils and not fetch another for a considerable time.  That is to say, he
obstinacy of that leviathan in having his spoutings out, as the fishermen
of the whale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings --that all this should
once raise its head above the surface.  But owing to his marked internal
one they are alike.  Now, why should the whale thus insist upon having his
only live by inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere.  Wherefore
phrase it.  This is what I mean.  If unmolested, upon rising to the surface,
precisely the case with the whale, who systematically lives, by intervals,
principle, I do not think I shall err; though I may possibly use some
really water, or nothing but vapor --this is surely a noteworthy thing.  Let
sea, he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him, just as the camel
seventy times, that is, respires seventy breaths; then whenever he rises
spouting all over the sea, and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the
spoutings out, unless it be to replenish his reservoir of air, ere
structure which gives him regular lungs, like a human being's, the whale can
superfluous scientific words.  Assume it, and it follows that if all the
the Sperm Whale will continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with
the necessity
to make good his regular allowance of air.  And not till those seventy breaths
true, seems the more cogent to me, when I consider the otherwise inexplicable
us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting items contingent.
vessels, which vessels, when he quits the surface, are completely distended
which they swim, hence, a herring or a cod might live a century, and never
with oxygenated blood.  So that for an hour or more, a thousand fathoms in the
would then live without breathing.  Anomalous as it may seem, this is


     I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me; and ere long saw reflected
     Other poets have warbled the praises of
--glorified by a rainbow, as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his
--upper, middle, and lower.  The fibres in the upper and lower layers, are long
.. < chapter lxxxvi 16  THE TAIL >
.. <p 372 >
.. <p 372 >
.. <p 373 >
Sperm Whale's tail to begin at that point of the trunk where it tapers to
about the girth of a man, it comprises upon its upper surface alone, an area
act of thinking deep thoughts.  While composing a little treatise on Eternity,
after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic, of an August noon; this
alights; less celestial, I celebrate a tail.  Reckoning the largest sized
and so on, there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam, while in the
being, inasmuch as it is an undisputed fact that he is never found on
but doubts or denials, few along with them, have intuitions.  Doubts of all
conclusion I am impelled, by considerations touching the great inherent
defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes.  At its utmost
desert; even then, the whale always carries a small basin of water on his
dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale; I account him no common, shallow
expansion in the full grown whale, the tail will considerably exceed twenty
feet across.  The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded
happen, your skin will feverishly smart, from the acridness of the thing so
head, as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled
head.  The invariable moisture of my hair, while plunged in deep thought,
heard it said, and I do not much doubt it, that if the jet is fairly spouted
heavenly ray.  And for this I thank God; for all have doubts; many deny;
hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish.  My hypothesis is this:
incommunicable contemplations, and that vapor --as you will sometimes see it
into two broad, firm, flat palms or flukes, gradually shoaling away to less
into your eyes, it will blind you.  The wisest thing the investigator can do
irradiate vapor.  And so, through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my
makes neither believer nor infidel, but makes a man who regards them both
mind, divine intuitions now and then shoot, enkindling my fog with a
monster, to behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea; his
of at least fifty square feet.  The compact round body of its root expands
overlap, then sideways recede from each other like wings, leaving a wide
peering into it, and putting his face in it.  You cannot go with your pitcher
ponderous and profound.  And I am convinced that from the heads of all
ponderous profound beings, such as Plato, Pyrrho, the Devil, Jupiter, Dante,
raises our conceit of the mighty, misty
say, the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm.  Wherefore, among whalemen,
seems an additional argument for the above supposition.  And how nobly it
sinews; but cut into it, and you find that three distinct strata compose it:
slight contact with the outer, vapory shreds of the jet, which will often
soundings, or near shores; all other whales sometimes are.  He is both
spout, whether with some scientific object in view, or otherwise, I cannot
than an inch in thickness.  At the crotch or junction, these flukes slightly
that the spout is nothing but mist.  And besides other reasons, to this
the soft eye of the antelope, and the lovely plumage of the bird that never
the spout is deemed poisonous; they try to evade it.  Another thing; I have
then, it seems to me, is to let this deadly spout alone.  Still, we can
there, a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over my
things earthly, and intuitions of some things heavenly; this combination
thoughts.  For, d'ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear air; they only
to this fountain and fill it, and bring it away.  For even when coming into
touching it.  And I know one, who coming into still closer contact with the
touching the precise nature of the whale spout.  It will not do for him to be
up with rain.  Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious
vacancy between.  In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely
vast, mild head overhung by a canopy of vapor, engendered by his
with equal eye.

     breach --somewhere else to be described --this peaking of the whale's flukes is
.. <p 375 >
.. <p 376 >
.. <p 377 >
Leviathan's tail, his trunk is but the stalk of a lily.  The most direful
Thou shalt see my back parts, my tail, he seems to say, but my face shall not
What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch!  Had this tail any
You would almost think a great gun had been discharged; and if you noticed
a large herd of whales in the east, all heading towards the sun, and for a
a moment, till they downwards shoot out of view.  Excepting the sublime
air; then smiting the surface, the thunderous concussion resounds for miles.
all beings.  For according to King Juba, the military elephants of antiquity
all.
and never will.  But if I know not even the tail of this whale, how
assailant.  Dissect him how I may, then, I but go skin deep; I know him not,
balls.  The more I consider this mighty tail, the more do I deplore my
blow from the elephant's trunk were as the playful tap of a fan, compared with
bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatching at the
elephant, I then testified of the whale, pronouncing him the most devout of
elephant, so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk of the
embodiment of adoration of the gods was never beheld, even in Persia, the
equality, much less the creatures to which they respectively belong.  For as
extensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, are these mystic gestures,
floating posture of the leviathan the flukes lie considerably below the level
general body, full of strangeness, and unaccountable to his most experienced
highest heaven.  So in dreams, have I seen majestic Satan thrusting forth his
his power in his play.  The broad palms of his tail are flirted high into the
his tail; for I have heard of yet another elephant, that when wounded in
home of the fire worshippers.  As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African
in repeated instances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all
inability to express it.  At times there are gestures in it, which, though
kitten-like, he plays on the ocean as if it were a hearth.  But still you see
mast-head of my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea, I once saw
moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes.  As it seemed to me at the
none?
nosegays to damsels, and then caressed their zones.  On more accounts than
of his back, they are then completely out of sight beneath the surface; but
often hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in the profoundest
one, a pity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile virtue in
other are concerned, should not tend to place those two opposite organs on an
perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature.  Out of the
prehensile power, I should straightway bethink me of Darmonodes' elephant
scenes, it is all in all what mood you are in; if in the Dantean, the devils
seas, you find him unbent from the vast corpulence of his dignity, and
silence.  The chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and the
symbols; that the whale, indeed, by these methods intelligently conversed
that I have heard hunters who have declared them akin to Free-Mason signs and
that so frequented the flower-market, and with low salutations presented
the fight, curved round his trunk and extracted the dart.  Fourth: Stealing
the light wreath of vapor from the spiracle at his other extremity, you would
the measureless crush and crash of the sperm whale's ponderous flukes, which
the mightiest elephant is but a terrier to Leviathan, so, compared with
their oars and crews into the air, very much as an Indian juggler tosses his
they would well grace the hand of man, remain wholly inexplicable.  In an
think that that was the smoke from the touch-hole.  Fifth: As in the ordinary
thirty feet of his body are tossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating
time, such a grand
tormented colossal claw from the flame Baltic of Hell.  But in gazing at such
unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of the middle of solitary
understand his head?  much more, how comprehend his face, when face he has
when he is about to plunge into the deeps, his entire flukes with at least
will occur to you; if in that of Isaiah, the archangels.  Standing at the
with the world.  Nor are there wanting other motions of the whale in his
.. <p 379 >
.. <p 380 >
Pequod's deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill of the sea, this host
Sperm Whale into such immense caravans, may be imputed the circumstance that
almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and
and kentledge.  She carries years' water in her.  Clear old prime Nantucket
and swimming on, in one solid, but still crescentic centre.  Crowding all sail
and with delighted nostrils the fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air, yet
as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast of Java, in the
blending atmosphere of bluish haze, showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys
both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles, and forming a great
branches, like the cleft drooping boughs of a willow, the single
caravan, Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming, like the
covenant for mutual assistance and protection.  To this aggregation of the
crescent in our van, we beheld another in our rear.  It seemed formed of
cruising; therefore, as the Pequod gained more and more upon Java Head, the
detached companies, as in former times, are now frequently met with in
even in the best cruising grounds, you may now sometimes sail for weeks and
extensive herds, sometimes embracing so great a multitude, that it would
flood had come; they would only answer -- Well, boys, here's the ark!  Now,
forward-slanting spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of
have sighted one grain of soil; her crew having seen no man but floating
held, little doubt had they, that chased through these Straits of Sunda,
hold.  She is ballasted with utilities; not altogether with unusable pig-lead
horseman on a height.  As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in
in the Pacific, prefers to drink before the brackish fluid, but yesterday
leviathans before us; when, of a sudden, the voice of Tashtego was heard,
look-outs were repeatedly hailed, and admonished to keep wide awake.  But
loudly cheering from the heads of their yet suspended boats.  If the wind only
loudly directing attention to something in our wake.  Corresponding to the
months together, without being greeted by a single spout; and then be
near vicinity of the straits of Sunda; indeed, as most of the ground,
not a single jet was descried.  Almost renouncing all thought of falling in
oceans, the Sperm Whales, instead of almost invariably sailing in small
of not a few of their number.  And who could tell whether, in that congregated
of some dense metropolis, descried of a balmy autumnal morning, by some
of vapory spouts, individually curling up into the air, and beheld through a
passage in their rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon the
plain; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward
rafted off in casks, from the Peruvian or Indian streams.  Hence it is, that,
roundabout, was generally recognised by the fishermen as an excellent spot for
seamen like themselves.  So that did you carry them the news that another
semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon, a continuous chain of
singular magnificence saluted us.  But here be it premised, that owing to the
straight perpendicular
suddenly saluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands.  Broad on
the Pequod pressed after them; the harpooneers handling their weapons, and
the customary cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a spectacle of
the mountains, accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous
the vast host would only deploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture
though the green palmy cliffs of the land soon loomed on the starboard bow,
through the straits; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle,
touching at a score of ports, the whale-ship, in all that interval, may not
twin-jets of the Right Whale, which, dividing at top, falls over in two
unwearied activity with which of late they have been hunted over all four
water; which, when three years afloat, the Nantucketer,
weapons and their wants.  She has a whole lake's contents bottled in her ample
whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the noon-day air.  Unlike the
while other ships may have gone to China from New York, and back again,
white mist, continually rising and falling away to leeward.  Seen from the
with any game hereabouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when
with stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along, driving these
world-wandering whale-ship carries no cargo but herself and crew, their
worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of the Siamese!  So


     originally invented by the Nantucket Indians, called druggs.  Two thick
     power of speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him; as
.. <p 384 >
.. <p 385 >
But upon flinging the third, in the act of tossing overboard the clumsy
The first and second were successfully darted, and we saw the whales
Though such a movement on the part of the whale struck under such
afterwards killed at your leisure.  Hence it is, that at times like these the
all the time, Starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, pricking out of
among gallied whales that this drugg is used.  For then, more whales are close
being looped, it can in a moment be fastened to a harpoon.  It is chiefly
between two whales into the innermost heart of the shoal, as if from some
bottom as the seat slid from under him.  On both sides the sea came in at the
by the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale in his more quiet moods.  Yes,
cases, the boats at once separated, each making for some one lone whale on
central expanse the sea presented that smooth satin-like surface, called a
circumstances, is in no wise unprecedented; and indeed is almost always more
complicated channels and straits, knowing not at what moment it may be
cross each other's grain at right angles; a line of considerable length is
delirious throb.  As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer
dromedary that of a sudden rose bodily to the surface, and for an instant
drugg comes into requisition.  Our boat was furnished with three of them.
drugged-harpoons, were it not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale's
duty was now altogether dispensed with.  They chiefly attended to the shouting
edging away from that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead, while
every day encountered; while you may, then, you must kill all you can.  And
from the circumference of commotion, the direful disorders seemed waning.  So
his own fan-like extremity.  All whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances,
if you cannot kill them all at once, you must wing them, so that they can be
instant tore it out and carried it away, dropping the oarsman in the boat's
locked in and crushed.  But not a bit daunted, Queequeg steered us manfully;
mountain torrent we had slid into a serene valley lake.  Here the storms in the
now sheering off from this monster directly across our route in advance; now
of the fishery.  For as the swift monster drags you deeper and deeper into
or less anticipated; yet does it present one of the more perilous vicissitudes
our way whatever whales he could reach by short darts, for there was no time
part of the business.  Out of the way, Commodore!  cried one, to a great
retreated, but collectively remained in one place.  As is customary in those
roaring glens between the outermost whales, were heard but not felt.  In this
round you than you can possibly chase at one time.  But sperm whales are not
running away with us like light, steered straight for the heart of the herd.
ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest, and striving to steer through their
sleek, produced
squares of wood of equal size are stoutly clenched together, so that they
staggeringly running off, fettered by the enormous sidelong resistance of the
stopped the leaks for the time.  It had been next to impossible to dart these
that when at last the jerking harpoon drew out, and the towing whale sideways
the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us; our beset boat was like a
the frantic shoal, you bid adieu to circumspect life and only exist in a
the outskirts of the shoal.  In about three minutes' time, Queequeg's harpoon
then attached to the middle of this block, and the other end of the line
threatened to swamp us.  Hard down with your tail, there!  cried a second
to another, which, close to our gunwale, seemed calmly cooling himself with
to make long ones.  Nor were the oarsmen quite idle, though their wonted
towing drugg.  They were cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball.
vanished; then, with the tapering force of his parting momentum, we glided
was flung; the stricken fish darted blinding spray in our faces, and then
way greatly diminished; moreover, that as we went still further and further
we thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced as we flew, by
we were now in that enchanted calm which they say lurks at the heart of every
wooden block, it caught under one of the seats of the boat, and in an
wounded planks, but we stuffed two or three drawers and shirts in, and so

     circle, where abundance of room and some convenient retreats were afforded
--scrape away!  The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks,
.. <p 388 >
.. <p 389 >
Arnold, at the battle of Saratoga, carrying dismay wherever he went.  But
accidents of the fishery, this whale had become entangled in the harpoon-line
agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appalling spectacle enough,
any way; yet the peculiar horror with which he seemed to inspire the rest of
as it seemed, had broken away from the boat, carrying along with him half of
churning through the water, violently flailing with his flexible tail, and
clumped together at last in one dense body, they then renewed their onward
consternations and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre
contracting orbits the whales in the more central circles began to swim in
crossed by random whales, all violently making for one centre.  This lucky
cutting-spade, to which is attached a rope for hauling it back again.  A
darting to and fro across the circles, was nothing to what at last met our
dashing among the revolving circles like the lone mounted desperado
endeavor we at last shot into a temporary
evinced the activity of the other boats, still engaged in drugging the whales
eyes.  It is sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly
flukes close by.  Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was,
for another outlet.  After many similar hair-breadth escapes, we at last
freely and fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely
fright.  First, the whales forming the margin of our lake began to crowd a
from afar; then the lake itself began faintly to heave and swell; the
from his head by the air-eddy made by the sudden tossing of a pair of broad
great river Hudson breaks up in Spring, the entire host of whales came
in the deep.  And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of
inland there i still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy.  Meanwhile, as we
it soon resolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement; for having
leaving a narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths.  But by desperate
little, and tumble against each other, as if lifted by half spent billows
maiming his gigantic tail-tendon.  It is done by darting a short-handled
mountain.  Instantly Starbuck and Queequeg changed places; Starbuck taking
obscured from us.  But at length we perceived that by one of the unimaginable
of my being, do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm; and
on the frontier of the host; or possibly carrying on the war within the first
opening; then giving way rapidly, and at the same time earnestly watching
powerful and alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were, by sundering or
revelled in dalliance and delight.  But even so, amid the tornadoed Atlantic
salvation was cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg's hat, who, while
standing in the bows to prick the fugitive whales, had his hat taken clean
stay so!  Spring, men -- pull, men; never mind their backs --scrape them!
submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries vanished; in more and more
swiftly glided into what had just been one of the outer circles, but now
that he towed; he had also run away with the cutting-spade in him; and while
the coils of the harpoon-line round his tail, the cutting-spade itself had
the free end of the rope attached to that weapon, had permanently caught in
the harpoon line; and in the extraordinary agony of the wound, he was now
the herd, was owing to a cause which at first the intervening distance
the stern.  Oars!  Oars!  he intensely whispered, seizing the helm -- gripe
them.  But the sight of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly
thickening clusters.  Yes, the long calm was departing.  A low advancing hum
this terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their stationary
thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden frantic spectacles in the distance
tossing the keen spade about him, wounding and murdering his own comrades.
tumbling upon their inner centre, as if to pile themselves up in one common
was soon heard; and then like to the tumultuous masses of block-ice when the
whale wounded (as we afterwards learned) in this part, but not effectually,
while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round me, deep down and deep
worked loose from his flesh.  So that tormented to madness, he was now
you Queequeg --the whale there! --prick him! --hit him!  Stand up --stand up, and
your oars, and clutch your souls, now!  My God, men, stand by!  Shove him off,



     Bashaw assails him, and chases him away!  High times, indeed, if
     The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whale betakes
     then a love of ease and virtue supplants the love for maidens; our Ottoman
.. <p 391 >
.. <p 392 >
Equator awhile, they start for the Oriental waters in anticipation of the
Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathan coming that way, presume to
Turks; for these Grand Turks are too lavish of their strength, and hence
When serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strange suspicious
all alone among the meridians and parallels saying his prayers, and warning
all over the world; every baby an exotic.  In good time, nevertheless, as the
ancient one.  Like venerable moss-bearded Daniel Boone, he will have no one
ardor of youth declines; as years and dumps increase; as reflection lends
awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity to young Lothario, like pious Solomon
be in sight, the fishermen will seldom give chase to one of these Grand
broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some instances, wrenched and dislocated
called by the fishermen a school, so is the lord and master of that school
cause the most terrible duels among their rival admirers; just so with the
character, however admirably satirical, that after going to school himself,
cool season there, and so evade the other excessive temperature of the year.
country-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days, and what
devoutly worshipping among his thousand concubines.  Granting other whales to
disbands the harem, and grown to an exemplary, sulky old soul, goes about
draw confidentially close to one of the ladies, with what prodigious fury the
each young Leviathan from his amorous errors.  Now, as the harem of whales is
enters upon the impotent, repentant, admonitory stage of life, forswears,
feeding season, having just returned, perhaps, from spending the summer in
female whales are characteristically timid, the young males, or
few are captured having the deep scars of these encounters, --furrowed heads,
for the supremacy like elks that warringly interweave their antlers.  Not a
he should then go abroad inculcating not what he learned there, but the folly
her solemn pauses; in short, as a general lassitude overtakes the sated Turk;
himself in his advancing years, is true of all aged Sperm Whales.  Almost
lord.  Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them again and revels there
mentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools.  For while those
might be named, my Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery, however much for
mouths.  but supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away at
must have read the memoirs of Vidocq, and informed himself what sort of a
near him but Nature herself; and her he takes to wife in the wilderness of
notorious Lothario out
of domestic bliss; though do what the Bashaw will, he cannot keep the most
of his bed; for, alas!  all fish bed in common.  As ashore, the ladies often
of it.  His title, schoolmaster, would very naturally
only the maternal help.  For like certain other omnivorous roving lovers that
secrets.  The schools composing none but young and vigorous males, previously
seem derived from the name bestowed upon the harem itself, but some have
sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his interesting family.
surmised that the man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale,
technically known as the schoolmaster.  It is therefore not in strict
the Northern seas, and so cheating summer of all unpleasant weariness and
the bower; and so, being a great traveller, he leaves his anonymous babies
the first rush of the harem's lord, then is it very diverting to watch that
their unctuousness is small.  As for the sons and the daughters they beget,
universally, a lone whale --as a solitary Leviathan is called --proves an
unprincipled young rakes like him are to be permitted to invade the sanctity
warmth.  By the time they have lounged up and down the promenade of the
was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated into some of his pupils.
waters, and the best of wives she is, though she keeps so many moody
whales, who sometimes come to deadly battle, and all for love.  They fence
why, those sons and daughters must take care of themselves; at least, with
with their long lower jaws, sometimes locking them together, and so striving



     Ultimately the defendants (the crew of another ship) came up with the whale,
     but a
     crim.  con.  case, wherein a gentleman, after in vain trying to bridle his
     to the defendants; the whale, because it was a Loose-Fish at the time of the
.. <p 395 >
.. <p 396 >
Fast-Fish?  What are the Duke of Dunder's hereditary towns and hamlets but
Fast-Fish?  What to that redoubted harpooneer, John Bull, is poor Ireland,
Philistines, has but two props to stand on.  Is it not a saying in every one's
a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her, the lady then became that subsequent
afterwards took the fish; ergo, the aforesaid articles were theirs.  A common
and cheese of hundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers (all sure of
and elucidated by Lord Ellenborough in the above cited case; these two laws
archbishop of Savesoul's income of 100,000 pounds seized from the scant bread
but Fast-Fish, whereof possession is the whole of the law?  What to the
but a Fast-Fish?  And concerning all these, is not Possession the whole of
but a Fast-Fish?  What to that apostolic lancer, Brother Jonathan, is Texas
came into possession?  But often possession is the whole of the law.  What are
captain snapped his fingers in the plaintiffs' teeth, and assured them that by
defendants; Lord Ellenborough was the judge.  In the course of the defence,
final capture; and the harpoons and line because when the fish made off with
from starvation; what is that ruinous discount but a Fast-Fish?  What is the
fundamentals of all human jurisprudence; For notwithstanding its complicated
gentleman's property, along with whatever harpoon might have been found
gets from poor Woebegone, the bankrupt, on a loan to keep Woebegone's family
harpoons, and boat, which had remained attached to the whale at the time of
heaven without any of Savesoul's help) what is that globular 100,000 but a
in set terms decided, to wit, --That as for the boat, he awarded it to the
instituted an action to recover possession of her.  Erskine was on the other
internationally and universally applicable.  What was America in
kindred doctrine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so.  That is
man looking at this decision of the very learned Judge, might possibly object
mouth, Possession is half of the law: that is, regardless of how the thing
of the great stress of her plunging viciousness, had as last abandoned her;
of the whale and the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.  These
of their whale, line, harpoons, and boat.  Mr. Erskine was counsel for the
originally harpooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason
plaintiffs, because they had merely abandoned it to save their lives; but
pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard, the very learned judge
principles laid down in the twin whaling laws previously quoted, and applied
rapacious landlord is the widow's last mite but a Fast-Fish?  What is yonder
side; and he then supported it by saying, that though the gentleman had
sticking in her.  Now in the present case Erskine contended that the examples
struck, killed, seized, and finally appropriated it before the very eyes of
that but a Fast-Fish?  What is the ruinous discount which Mordecai, the broker,
that with regard to the controverted whale, harpoons, and line, they belonged
the law?  But if the doctrine of Fast-Fish be pretty generally applicable, the
the plaintiffs.  And when those defendants were remonstrated with, their
the seas of life; but in the course of years, repenting of that step, he
the seizure.  Wherefore the plaintiffs now sued for the recovery of the value
the sinews and souls of Russian serfs and Republican slaves
the witty Erskine went on to illustrate his position, by alluding to a recent
them, it (the fish) acquired a property in those articles; and hence anybody
to it.  But ploughed up to the primary rock of the matter, the two great
touching Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish, I say, will, on reflection, be found the
tracery of sculpture, the Temple of the Law, like the Temple of the
undetected villain's marble mansion with a door-plate for a waif; what is
way of doxology to the deed he had done, he would now retain their line,
who afterwards took the fish had a right to them.  Now the defendants
wife's viciousness, had at last abandoned her upon
yet abandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish; and therefore when


     In vain it was to rake
     Is this the still militant old man, standing at the corners of the three
(both letters were published) that he had already done so, and received the
(the reverend gentleman) would decline meddling with other people's business.
.. < chapter xci 2  THE PEQUOD MEETS THE ROSE-BUD >
.. <p 399 >
.. <p 400 >
.. <p 401 >
And by the soundest commentators this has ever been held a cogent argument
Queen-pinmoney, an old King's Bench author, one William Prynne, thus
Stubb, that somewhere hereabouts are some of those drugged whales we tickled
a sagacious lawyer like Prynne.  But is the Queen a mermaid, to be presented
alongside of it.  Yet are there those who will still do it; notwithstanding
alongside; and this second whale seemed even more of a nosegay than the
and so floated an unappropriated corpse.  It may well be conceived, what an
around him, it was plain that the whale alongside must be what the fishermen
begging him to take the case of those unfortunate
call a blasted whale, that is, a whale that has died unmolested on the sea,
caught belongs to the King and Queen, because of its superior excellence.
discourseth: Ye tail is ye Queen's, that ye Queen's wardrobe may be supplied
divided in the same way as the whale, the King receiving the highly dense and
eddying cloud of vulture sea-fowl that circled, and hovered, and swooped
elastic head peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically regarded, may
first.  In truth, it turned out to be one of those problematical whales that
for Ambergriese in the paunch of this Leviathan, insufferable fetor denying
forth.  But Plowdon gives us the reason for it.  Says Plowdon, the whale so
from the Sovereign.  We must needs inquire then on what principle the Sovereign
furled sails betokened that some sort of whale must be alongside.  As we
glided nearer, the stranger showed French colors from his peak; and by the
in such matters.  But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the
in this case the alleged right of the Duke to the whale was a delegated one
indeed is it regarded by some, that no cupidity could persuade them to moor
is originally invested with that right.  The law itself has already been set
kingdoms, on all hands coercing alms of beggars?  It will readily be seen that
leaving their defunct bodies almost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil.
mariners into full consideration.  To which my Lord Duke in substance replied
money, and would be obliged to the reverend gentleman if for the future he
not inquiry.  Sir T. Browne, V. E.  It was a week or two after the last
of the Greenland or Right whale was largely used in ladies' bodices.  But this
of the crown's ordinary revenue.  I know not that any other author has hinted
of the matter; but by inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be
plague, when the living are incompetent to bury the departed.  So intolerable
possibly be humorously grounded upon some presumed congeniality.  And thus
property under certain limitations, and nominally supplying the tenth branch
quality, and by no means of the nature of attar-of-rose.  Coming still nearer
same bone is not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sad mistake for
seem
so styled by the English law writers -- the whale and the sturgeon; both royal
tail?  A reason for that, ye lawyers!  In his treatise on Queen-Gold, or
the fact that the oil obtained from such subjects is of a very inferior
the other day.  I thought they would keel up before long.  Presently, the
there seems a reason in all things, even in law.
to dry up and die with a sort of prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion;
unsavory odor such a mass must exhale; worse than an Assyrian city in the
vapors in advance slid aside; and there in the distance lay a ship, whose
vapory, mid-day sea, that the many noses on the Pequod's deck proved more
very pleasant smell was smelt in the sea.  I will bet something now, said
vigilant discoverers than the three pairs of eyes aloft.  A peculiar and not
whaling scene recounted, and when we were slowly sailing over a sleepy,
with a tail?  An allegorical meaning may lurk here.  There are two royal fish
with the expiring breeze, we saw that the Frenchman had a second whale
with ye whalebone.  Now this was written at a time when the black limber bone




     He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one, is far
     What now?  said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.  Why, since he takes it so easy,
     puffing tobacco-smoke, so that it constantly filled their olfactories.
     said the Guernsey-man, in French, turning to his captain, that only
.. <p 404 >
.. <p 405 >
According to this little plan of theirs, the Guernsey-man, under cover of an
Captain's round-house abaft; and looking in that direction saw a fiery face
Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the stranger mate
Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to the
Rose-bud, that it's all nonsense trying to get any oil out of such whales?  As
Stubb was now politely introduced by the Guernsey-man, who at once
Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding from the
a bunch of posies, will ye, Bouton-de-Rose?  What in the devil's name do you
a red cotton velvet vest with watch-seals at his side.  To this gentleman,
aboard, and mayhap he'll believe you, if he won't me; and so I'll get out of
alongside.  Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.
and then pairs of them would drop their work, and run up to the mast-head to
appeared from his cabin.  He was a small and dark, but rather delicate looking
broken the stems of their pipes almost short off at the bowl, were vigorously
brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle.  Sounding him
called it) to avoid the pest; but still, could not help yelling out his
carefully, Stubb further perceived that the Guernsey-man had not the
entreaties and indignations at times.
expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited ignoramus, who had
for that dried up one, there, he hasn't a gill in his whole carcase.  I
from Stubb; and as for Stubb, he was to utter any nonsense that should come
from me he's a baboon.
get some fresh air.  Some thinking they would catch the plague, dipped oakum
getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales.  But they worked rather
hold it on.  Fine day, aint it?  Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us
in coal-tar, and at intervals held it to their nostrils.  Others having
interpreter's office, was to tell the Captain what he pleased, but as coming
keep cool--cool?  yes, that's the word; why don't you pack those whales in ice
know that well enough; but, d'ye see, the Captain here won't believe it;
man for a sea-captain, with large whiskers and moustache, however; and wore
more fit to command a whale-ship than a St.  Jago monkey.  In fact, tell him
of babyish to me, though I don't pretend to be a judge.  He says, Monsieur,
ostentatiously put on the aspect of interpreting between them.  What shall I
rejoined Stubb, and with that he soon mounted to the deck.  There a queer
sailors, had all died of a fever caught from a blasted whale they had brought
say to him first?  said he.  Why, said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the
scene presented itself.  The sailors, in tasselled caps of red worsted, were
slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris.  He therefore held his peace on
slow and talked very fast, and seemed in anything but a good humor.  All
tell him that now I have eyed him carefully, I'm quite certain that he's no
that head, but otherwise was quite frank and confidential with him, so that
the Captain, without his at all dreaming of distrusting their sincerity.
the day, had betaken himself to the Captain's round-house ( cabinet he
the two quickly concocted a little plan for both circumventing and satirizing
their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so many jib-booms.  Now
this dirty scrape.  Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow,
this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturer before.  But come
thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar from within.  This was the
tormented surgeon, who, after in vain remonstrating against the proceedings of
uppermost in him during the interview.  By this time their destined victim
want here?  roared the Guernsey-man, flying into a sudden passion.  Oh!
watch and seals, you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort
while you're working at 'em?  But joking aside, though; do you know,
yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whose captain and chief-mate, with six


     berg, to put up), this village was founded in order to afford a place for
     yet the two substances are quite distinct.  For amber, though at times found
.. <p 408 >
.. <p 409 >
Brandreth's pills, and then running out of harm's way, as laborers do in
Frenchman's two whales.  Elsewhere in this volume the slanderous aspersion has
Mecca, for the same purpose that frankincense is carried to St.  Peter's in
Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should be found in
Paul in Corinthians, about corruption and incorruption; how that we are sown
Rome.  Some wine merchants drop a few grains into claret, to flavor it.  Who
Yet so it is.  By some, ambergris is supposed to be the cause, and by others
a Lying-in Hospital.  I partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against
after completely filling her hold with oil, does not, perhaps, consume fifty
against whalemen, and which, in the estimation of some already biased minds,
always done; but cutting up the fresh blubber in small bits, thrust it
ambergris, certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought
been disproved, that the vocation of whaling is throughout a slatternly,
blasting rocks.  I have forgotten to say that there were found in this
brittle, odorless substance, used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and
cemeteries, in the Greenland dock, a savor is given forth somewhat similar to
certainly gave forth no very pleasant savor.  But all this is quite different
chapter with the above appeal, but cannot, owing to my anxiety to repel a
charge often made
days in the business of boiling out; and in the state that it is casked, the
fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and when the works were in full operation
from a South Sea Sperm Whaler; which in a voyage of four years perhaps,
hair-powders, and pomatum.  The Turks use it in cooking, and also carry it to
home to Holland for that purpose.  It was a collection of furnaces,
in dishonor, but raised in glory.  And likewise call to mind that saying of
in former times, of a Dutch village called Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg,
is never found except upon the sea.  Besides, amber is a hard, transparent,
means creatures of ill odor; nor can whalemen be recognised, as the people of
might be considered as indirectly substantiated by what has been said of the
might be sailors' trousers buttons; but it afterwards turned out that they
oil is nearly scentless.  The truth is, that living or dead, if but decently
on the sea-coast, is also dug up in some far inland soils, whereas ambergris
ornaments; but ambergris is soft, waxy, and so highly fragrant and spicy,
paracelsus about what it is that maketh the best musk.  Also forget not the
rudimental manufacturing stages, is the worst.  I should like to conclude the
ships in London, more than two centuries ago.  Because those whalemen did not
shortness of the season in those Icy Seas, and the sudden and violent storms
strange fact that of all things of ill-savor, Cologne-water, in its
that arising from excavating an old city grave-yard, for the foundations of
that it is largely used in perfumery, in pastiles, precious candles,
that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of the Greenland whaling
that upon breaking into the hold, and unloading one of these whale
the blubber of the dutch whale fleet to be tried out, without being taken
the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale.  How to cure such a dyspepsia it
the heart of such decay; is this nothing?  Bethink thee of that saying of St.
themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a sick whale!
then, and do not now, try out their oil at sea as the Southern ships have
through the bung holes of large casks, and carry it home in that manner; the
to which they are exposed, forbidding any other course.  The consequence is,
treated, whales as a species are by no
untidy business.  But there is another thing to rebut.  They hint that all
were hard to say, unless by administering three or four boat loads of
were nothing more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in that manner.
whalers may be likewise imputed to the existence on the coast of Greenland,
whales always smell bad.  Now how did this odious stigma originate?  I opine,
which latter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack, in his great
work on Smells, a textbook on that subject.  As its name imports (smeer, fat;
would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen should regale




     No boat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern.  Stubb's inexorable
     from the boat, is still better.  Moreover, as if perceiving at last that if
     he did not mean to, at least.  Because there were two boats in his wake, and
     my God!  who can tell it?  Mark, how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in
.. <p 412 >
.. <p 413 >
Alas!  Stubb was but too true to his word.  It was a beautiful, bounteous,
Bobbing up and down in that sea, Pip's ebon head showed like a head of cloves.
But it so happened, that those boats, without seeing Pip, suddenly spying
Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted, that though man loved his fellow,
The intense concentration of self in the middle of such a heartless immensity,
Tranquilly permitting these irregular cursings to evaporate, Stubb then in a
advice, and concluded with a peremptory command, Stick to the boat, Pip, or
again.  It was under very similar circumstances to the first performance; but
against his chest, he breasted it overboard with him, so as to become
almost invariably in the fishery, a coward, so called, is marked with the same
and pick him up; though, indeed, such considerations towards oarsmen
and that done, unofficially gave him much wholesome advice.  The substance
another lonely castaway, though the loftiest and the brightest.  Now, in calm
as the soundest advice ever is.  Now, in general, Stick to the boat, is
back was turned upon him; and the whale was winged.  In three minutes, a
blue day; the spangled sea calm and cool, and flatly stretching away, all
by the Lord, I wont pick you up if you jump; mind that.  We can't afford
entangled in it, when at last plumping into the water.  That instant the
exclaimed interrogatively, cut?  meantime pip's blue, choked face plainly
he should give undiluted conscientious advice to Pip, he would be leaving him
he supposed, no doubt, that they would of course come up to Pip very quickly,
his benevolence.  But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped
his chest and neck.  Tashtego stood in the bows.  He was full of the fire of
hunters in all similar instances; and such instances not unfrequently occur;
involuntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap, paddle in hand,
jeopardized through their own timidity, is not always manifested by the
looked, Do, for God's sake!  All passed in a flash.  In less than half a
minute, this entire thing happened.  Damn him, cut!  roared Stubb; and so
of the sea, poor Pip turned his crisp, curling, black head to the sun,
out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack whale line coming
plain, business-like, but still half humorous manner, cursed Pip officially;
poor little negro was assailed by yells and execrations from the crew.
presto!  poor Pip came all foaming up to the chocks of the boat,
remorselessly dragged there by the line, which had taken several turns around
ride in a spring-carriage ashore.  But the awful lonesomeness is intolerable.
round, to the horizon, like gold-beater's skin hammered out to the extremest.
ruthless detestation peculiar to military navies and armies.
sheath, he suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards Stubb,
sides.  But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate?  No;
stricken whale started on a fierce run, the line swiftly straightened; and
the hunt.  He hated Pip for a poltroon.  Snatching the boat-knife from its
the open sea --mark how closely they hug their ship and only coast along her
the whale was lost and Pip was saved.  So soon as he recovered himself, the
this time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale started
to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would sell for thirty times what
to run, Pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurried traveller's trunk.
too wide a margin to jump in for the future; Stubb suddenly dropped all
was, Never jump from a boat, Pip, except --but all the rest was indefinite,
weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to the practised swimmer as to
whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; and Stubb's boat
whole mile of shoreless ocean was between Pip and Stubb.  Out from the centre
yet man is a money-making animal, which propensity too often interferes with
you would, Pip, in Alabama.  Bear that in mind, and don't jump any more.
your true motto in whaling; but cases will sometimes happen when Leap






     and have a long talk with its inmates.  This place has previously been
     but in the wife, the heart, the bed, the table, the saddle, the fire-side,
     eternally.  In thoughts of the visions of the night, I saw long rows of
     it operates like a leathern squilgee; and by nameless blandishments, as of
     now, since by many prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in
.. <p 416 >
Leviathan's tail: it averages an inch in thickness, and for the rest, is
Leviathan.  Nippers.  Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale's
There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in the
They generally go in pairs, --a pike-and-gaff-man and a spade-man.  The
about the size of the iron part of a hoe.  Edgewise moved along the oily deck,
all cases man must eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of
and also from the thicker portions of his flukes.  It is tough with congealed
and lurches about.  Meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheet itself,
and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and often participating to a
angels in paradise, each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti.  Now, while
as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis le Gros might
attainable felicity; not placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy;
beautiful object to behold.  As its name imports, it is of an exceedingly
business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.  First comes
called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but sometimes
confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it.  It tasted something
considerable degree in its unctuousness.  It is a most refreshing, convivial,
course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately
discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things akin to it, in the
fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.
from the whale, the white-horse is first cut into portable oblongs ere going
from the whale.  When the proper time arrives for cutting up its contents,
gaff is something like a boat-hook.  With his gaff, the gaffman hooks on to a
have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day after the venison
incidentally used by the sperm fishermen.  It designates the dark, glutinous
is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of
is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the whale's flesh, here
magic, allures along with it all impurities.  But to learn all about these
mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted
much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt that ignoble
of citron.  Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself from eating it.  I
oozy, stringy affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a
perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces.  This spade is
prolonged squeezing, and subsequent decanting.  I hold it to be the
recondite matters, your best way is at once to descend into the blubber-room,
rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked snowy and golden ground, dotted with
season, and that particular venison season contemporary with an unusually
sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the ship pitches
side, lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen.
sperm of kindness.  Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever!  For
spots of the deepest crimson and purple.  It is plums of rubies, in pictures
substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right whale, and
tendons --a wad of muscle --but still contains some oil.  After being severed
the country; now that I have perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case
this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros, especially by night.  On one
to describe.  It is called slobgollion; an appellation original with the
to the mincer.  They look much like blocks of Berkshire marble.  Plum-pudding
vocabulary.  But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so.  A whaleman's nipper
whalemen, and even so is the nature of the substance.  It is an ineffably
whaling-pike is similar to a frigate's boarding-weapon of the same name.  The
white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering part of the fish,
wondrously thin, ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.  Gurry, so


     always the whale-ship's stokers.  With huge pronged poles they pitched
     inclosed surface of the works.  By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this
.. <p 419 >
.. <p 420 >
During the night-watches some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and
Here lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red
The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful
beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, out of the doors to catch
blubber, now called scraps or fritters, still contains considerable of its
bore down upon the turkish frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.  The
burning martyr, or a self-consuming misanthrope, once ignited, the whale
by a large, sloping, battened hatchway.  Removing this hatch we expose the
coil themselves away there for a nap.  While employed in polishing them --one
cook, fire the works.  This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been
deed.  So the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs of the bold Hydriote, Canaris,
doors of iron.  The intense heat of the fire is prevented from communicating
features, now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and
flames, which at intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and
for a time with wood.  After that no wood is used, except as a means of quick
for the pit.  By midnight the works were in full operation.  We were clear
from the carcase; sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild
furnaces, directly underneath the pots.  These mouths are fitted with heavy
go back for a moment.  It was about nine o'clock at night that the Pequod's
great try-pots, two in number, and each of several barrels' capacity.  When
hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearth in front
heat of the fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads.  Their tawny
hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, or stirred up the fires
ignition to the staple fuel.  In a word, after being tried out, the crisp,
illuminated every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire.
issuing from their midnight harbors, with broad sheets of flame for sails,
itself to the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire
leap into their faces.  Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side
man in each pot, side by side --many confidential communications are carried
masonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of the
meditation.  It was in the left hand try-pot of the Pequod, with the
my soapstone for example, will descend from any point in precisely the same
no external chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall.  And here let us
not in use, they are kept remarkably clean.  Sometimes they are polished
not only that, but you must live in it for the time.  It has an unspeakable,
ocean darkness was intense.  But that darkness was licked up by the fierce
of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass.  This served for a sea-sofa.
of them.  Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of the pagan harpooneers,
on, over the iron lips.  It is a place also for profound mathematical
oversee the business.  All ready there?  Off hatch, then, and start her.  You
own smoke!  for his smoke is horrible to inhale, and inhale it you must, and
ponderous knees of iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down to the
pyres.  It smells like the left wing of the day of judgment; it is an argument
reservoir is kept replenished with water as fast as it evaporates.  There are
said that in a whaling voyage the first fire in the try-works has to be fed
shrivelled
soapstone diligently circling round me, that I was first indirectly struck by
supplies his own fuel and burns by his own body.  Would that he consumed his
the remarkable fact, that in geometry all bodies gliding along the cycloid,
the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness to
them by the feet.  The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps.  To every pitch of
thrusting his shavings into the furnace throughout the passage.  Here be it
timbers.  On the flanks it is cased with wood, and at top completely covered
time.  Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare
try-works were first started on this present voyage.  It belonged to Stubb to
unctuous properties.  These fritters feed the flames.  Like a plethoric
wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk in the vicinity of funereal
with soapstone and sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls.




     Already has it been
     Had you descended from the Pequod's
     for one single moment you would have almost thought you were standing in
     whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he lives in light.  He makes his
.. < chapter xcvii 9  THE LAMP >
.. < chapter xcviii 2  STOWING DOWN AND CLEARING UP >
.. <p 423 >
.. <p 423 >
.. <p 424 >
And even if he for ever flies within the gorge, that gorge is in the
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed
Solomon.  But even Solomon, he says, the man that wandereth out of the way
There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness.  And there
and blow.  While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the
and vials, though --to the copper cooler at the try-works, and replenishes
beheaded was killed) his great padded surtout becomes the property of his
berth an Aladdin's lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitchiest
butter in April.  He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
course; and all round the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play
dark, and stumble in darkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot.  But the
deaden thee; as for the time it did me.
deck, like so many land slides, till at last man-handled and stayed in their
deep; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded; and how (on the
entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps --often but old bottles
executioner; how, in due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like
freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his
gorges, and soar out of them again and become invisible in the sunny spaces.
he is chased over the watery moors, and slaughtered in the valleys of the
headed over, end for end, and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery
hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.  In the sperm fishery, this is
higher than other birds upon the plain, even though they soar.
is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the blackest
its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown to
lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.  In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is
more scarce than the milk of queens.  To dress in the dark, and eat in the
mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the mountain eagle is still
night the ship's black hull still houses an illumination.  See with what
of the dead.  Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it invert thee,
of understanding shall remain ( i.  e.  even while living) in the congregation
own supper of game.
part of the description by rehearsing --singing, if I may -- the romantic
principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the
proceeding of decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into
related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from the mast-head; how
six-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling this
sliding along beneath the surface as before; but, alas!  never more to rise
solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore.  It is sweet as early grass
some illuminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors.  There they lay in
the hold, where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities,
the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the great hatchways are
their final rest in the sea.  This done, the hatches are replaced, and
their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselled muteness; a score of
them there, as mugs of ale at a vat.  He burns, too, the purest of oil, in
through the fire; --but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this
tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous
try-works to the Pequod's forecastle, where the off duty watch were sleeping,
unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and down go the casks to
upon them, for now, ex officio, every sailor is a cooper.  At length, when
way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed round and
wise, and therefore jolly; --not that man is fitted to sit down on


     There's something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and all
     it last.  For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and
.. <p 427 >
.. <p 428 >
Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.
The firm tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the
a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through the
and mainmast; but in the multiplicity of other things requiring narration it
any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow.  Nor, though placed amongst
approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left
as though now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself in some
banners waving, are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold
be it, then.  Born in throes, 't is fit that man should live in pains and die
before he wheeled out of a former equinox at Aries!  From storm to storm!  So
beneath the great equator, and named after it; and it had been cast midway
binnacle
binnacle, with his glance fastened on the pointed needle in the compass, that
bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate to
bright coin came from a country planted in the middle of the world, and
by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at Libra.
cannot solve itself.  Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but
glance shot like a javelin with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and
glass, to each and every man in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious
gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, the head-waters of
has not been added how that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in
have left their mouldings there since yesterday, murmured Starbuck to
himself, leaning against the bulwarks.  The old
his mood, he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and stand there
however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
in pangs!  So be it, then!  Here's stout stuff for woe to work on.  So be it,
letters you saw the likeness of three Andes' summits; from one a flame; a
live to spend it.  Now those noble golden coins of South America are as
livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover any pilfering
many a Pactolus flows.  And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of iron
medals of the sun and tropic token-pieces.  Here palms, alpacas, and
monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them.  And some certain
not hopefulness.  But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed
other grand and lofty things; look here, --three peaks as proud as Lucifer.
passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.  It so chanced that
riveted glance fastened upon the riveted gold coin there, he still wore the
round border it bore the letters, REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO.  So this
round gold is but the image of the rounder globe, which, like a magician's
round world itself but an empty cipher, except to sell by the cartload, as
same aspect of nailed firmness, only dashed with a certain wild longing, if
see!  aye, he enters the sign of storms, the equinox!  and but six months
seems almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories, by
segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
self.  Great pains, small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it
significance lurks in all things, else all things are little worth, and the
strangely eyeing the particular object before him.  When he halted before the
the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy example of these things.  On its
the white whale's talisman.  Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch
then.  No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil's claws must
they do hills about Boston, to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.  Now
this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of the heart of
to be newly attracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it,
tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a
undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab; and this
up the Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn.  Zoned by those
volcanoes; sun's disks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich
when resuming his walk he again paused before the mainmast, then, as the same




     And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I'm a crow,
     and at two cents the cigar, that's nine hundred and
     desperate.  Ha, ha!  old Ahab!  the White Whale; he'll nail ye!  This is a
     found something there in the vicinity of his thigh --I guess it's Sagittarius,
--fire worshipper, depend upon it.  Ho!  more and more.  This way comes Pip
--poor boy!  would he had died, or I; he's half horrible to me.  He too has
.. <p 431 >
.. <p 432 >
Cannibal?  As I live he's comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone; thinks
I can stand the rest, for they have plain wits; but he's too crazy-witty
again; what does that mean?  Hark!  he's muttering --voice like an old
and whoever raises a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him.  So,
been watching all of these interpreters --myself included --and look now, he
bones stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves
caw!  Ain't I a crow?  And where's the scare-crow?  There he stands; two
comes to read,
could go hang myself.  Any way, for the present, I'll quit Pip's vicinity.
especially when I stand a'top of this pine tree here.  Caw!  caw!  caw!  caw!  caw!
foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of
for an old button off some king's trowsers.  But, aside again!  here comes
for my sanity.  So, so, I leave him muttering.  Here's the ship's navel,
found a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey's wedding ring.  How
gold.  And what's the horse-shoe sign?  The lion is the horse-shoe sign --the
have to say.  There; he's before it; he'll out with something presently.  So,
he's been studying Murray's Grammar!  Improving his mind, poor fellow!  But
hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he took to the sea.  He
here's nine hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to spy 'em
in one kind of world, you see.  Dodge again!  here comes Queequeg --all
is ugly, too, for when aught's nailed to the mast it's a sign that things grow
little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let's hear what he'll
look, they look.  Why, he's getting it by heart --hist!  again.  I look,
look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.  Upon my soul,
luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other side of the
mast; why, there's a horse-shoe nailed on that side; and now he's back
of an old jacket.  Wonder if he means me? --complimentary! --poor lad! --I
only makes a sign to the sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the coin
or the Archer.  No: he don't know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it
out.  Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a
pine tree.  My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a pine tree once, and
raised, it must be in a month and a day, when the sun stands in some one of
roaring and devouring lion.  Ship, old ship!  my old head shakes to think of
sixty cigars.  I wont smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, and
so; he's beginning.  I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold,
tattooing --looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself.  What says the
that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the
the old women talk Surgeon's Astronomy in the back country.  And by Jove, he's
the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, I suppose, as
the sun then be?  The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right opposite the
thee.  There's another rendering now; but still one text.  All sorts of men
these signs.  I've studied signs, and know their marks; they were taught me
this doubloon here, and they are all on fire to unscrew it.  But, unscrew
toes of his pumps as usual.  What does he say, with that look of his?  Ah,
two score years ago, by the old witch in Copenhagen.  Now, in what sign will
what's all this staring been about?  It is worth sixteen dollars, that's true;
what's that he says now -- hist!  I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye
wiseish look to it.  But, avast; here comes our old Manxman --the old
with that unearthly idiot face.  stand away again and hear him.  hark!  I
worn-out coffee-mill.  Prick ears, and listen!  If the White Whale be
you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.  Well, that's funny.
your navel, and what's the consequence?  Then again, if it stays here, that


     get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw (for I have
     the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it.  But, Lord, look
--Mounttop; Mounttop--the captain); --as I was saying, I jumped into Mounttop's
--the whale's tail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air,
.. <p 435 >
.. <p 436 >
Englishman.  I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time.  Well, one day
I jumped into my first mate's boat --Mr. Mounttop's here (by the way, Captain
Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale it was --the noblest
We all struck out.  To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my
a bouncing great whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows' feet and
a devil of a boat's crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all this, I say,
after the second iron, to toss it overboard --down comes the tail like a Lima
and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life --I resolved to capture him, spite of
and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line.  Aye, I see! --wanted to part
arm off, did he?  asked Ahab, now sliding down from the capstan, and resting
arm towards the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a
aye --they were mine -- my irons, cried Ahab, exultingly -- but on!  Give me a
been all the time standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to
blind as a bat --both eyes out --all befogged and bedeadened with black foam
boat, which, d'ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and snatching
can shrink, d'ye see; and a leg that never can run.  Where did'st thou see
chance, then, said the Englishman, good-humoredly.  Well, this old
continued the one-armed commander, I do not know; but in biting the line, it
cursed second iron towing along near me caught me here (clapping his hand
denote his gentlemanly rank on board.  His face was an exceedingly round but
first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all chips.
fish.  But a combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant, the fish,
good God, the barb ript its way along the flesh --clear along the whole length
got foul of his teeth, caught there somehow; but we didn't know it then; so
great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam into the pod,
harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking
he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other, occasionally casting
hump!  instead of the other whale's that went off to windward, all fluking.
it; free the fast-fish --an old trick --I know him.  How it was exactly,
just below his shoulder); yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down
least; and that leg, too?  Spin me the yarn, said Ahab; how was it?  It
like a marble steeple.  No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at
midday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say,
of my arm --came out nigh my wrist, and up i floated; --and that gentleman
of the yarn.  The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had
on the Englishman's shoulder, as he did so.  Aye, he was the cause of it, at
pointing his ivory
round so, that my boat's crew could only trim dish, by sitting all their
sober one; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched
sterns on the outer gunwale.  Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea
surgeon: Bunger, my lad, -- the captain).  Now, Bunger boy, spin your part
suspended breath.  And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.  Aye,
taking one good dart forwards, went down like a flash; and the barb of that
telescope; There I saw him, on the Line, last season.  And he took that
that when we afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we came plump on to his
the White Whale? --how long ago?  The White Whale, said the Englishman,
the boiling rage he seemed to be in.  And thinking the hap-hazard line would
them; a regular circus horse he was, too, that went milling and milling
there will tell you the rest (by the way, captain --Dr.  Bunger, ship's
to Hell's flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the
tower, cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes
trowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attention between a marlingspike
was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line, began the
we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat fastened to one of
wrinkles.  It was he, it was he!  cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his
you, sir --hearts and souls alive, man --the next instant, in a jiff, I was



     But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks
     Ere the English ship fades from sight, be
     and there it stayed for a twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic,
) it fitted out the first English
) our valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket
, a fine ship, the
, this great whaling house was in existence, my numerous fish-documents
.. < chapter ci 10  THE DECANTER >
.. <p 439 >
.. <p 440 >
.. <p 440 >
.. <p 441 >
Amelia, fitted out for the express purpose, and at the sole charge of the
North and South Atlantic: not elsewhere.  Be it distinctly recorded here,
Samuel Enderby, merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling
against the bulwarks -- Man the boat!  Which way heading?  Good God!  cried
alongside of the Pequod.
always what least allures.  He's all a magnet!  How long since thou saw'st him
and didn't know him then; but not to another one.  No more White Whales for
and he heaved it up in small tacks, d'ye see.  No possible way for him to
and the Vineyard had in large fleets pursued that Leviathan, but only in the
another chance at you shortly, that's all.  No, thank ye, Bunger, said the
comes not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons, in
cried Bunger,  stoopingly walking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely
digest that jack-knife, and fully incorporate it into his general bodily
do not make plain; but in that year (
english captain, he's welcome to the arm he has, since I can't help it,
great glory in killing him, I know that; and there is a ship-load of
he only thinks to terrify by feints.  But sometimes he is like the old
he was standing in the boat's stern, and the Manilla men were springing to
house of enderby and sons; a house which in my poor whaleman's opinion,
hunted, for all that.  What is best let alone, that accursed thing is not
it set down here, that she hailed from London, and was named after the late
juggling fellow, formerly a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe
last?  Which way heading?  Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend's,
malice is only his awkwardness.  For he never means to swallow a single limb;
man's arm?  And he knows it too.  So that what you take for the White Whale's
me; I've lowered for him once, and that has satisfied me.  There would be
mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burial to
nations to lower a whale-boat of any sort in the great South Sea.  The
people of the whole globe who so harpooned him.  In
pocket, and drawing near to Ahab's arm.  Avast!  roared Ahab, dashing him
point of real historical interest.  How long, prior to the year of our Lord 0083
point! --his pulse makes these planks beat! --sir! --taking a lancet from his
precious sperm in him, but, hark ye, he's best let alone; don't you think
ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm Whale; though for some score of
snuffing; this man's blood --bring the thermometer; --it's at the boiling
so, Captain? --glancing at the ivory leg.  He is.  But he will still be
steel the great Sperm Whale; and that for half a century they were the only
stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own, Ahab stood upright till
swallow jack-knives, once upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest,
system.  Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are quick enough about it, and have a
that the Nantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized
the English Captain, to whom the question was put.  What's the matter?  He
the other, why in that case the arm is yours; only let the whale have
their oars.  In vain the English Captain hailed him.  With back to the
to take the boat's steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle
towards him, commanded the ship's sailors to stand by to lower.  In a moment
vigorous Enderbys, boldly rounded Cape Horn, and was the first among the
was heading east, I think. --Is your Captain crazy?  whispering Fedallah.
years previous (ever since


     Hitherto, in descriptively
     from which list, as translated by Dr.  Snodhead.  I transcribe the following: 0084400,000 lbs.  of beef. 60,000 lbs.  Friesland pork. 150,000 lbs.  of stock fish.
 20,000 lbs.  of Texel and Leyden cheese. 144,000 lbs.  cheese (probably an
 550,000 lbs.  of biscuit. 72,000 lbs.  of soft bread. 2,800 firkins of butter.
.. < chapter cii 2  A BOWER IN THE ARSACIDES >
.. <p 444 >
.. <p 445 >
Dr.  Snodhead, so soon as he spied the book, assured me that Dan Coopman did
Seas, on the very coasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial
Snodhead, a very learned man, professor of Low Dutch and High German in the
Spitzbergen sea, did not much exceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men
and Platonic application; and, furthermore, I compiled supplementary tables
and gills of good gin and good cheer.  At the time, I devoted three days to
be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdam cooper in the fishery, as every
case, however, where the reader is flooded with whole pipes, barrels, quarts,
cheese consumed, seems amazing.  I impute it, though, to their naturally
college of Santa Claus and St.  Pott's, to whom I handed the work for
every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland and Spitzbergen whale
example.  For, say they, when cruising in an empty ship, if you can get
fancy them to have been, were the right sort of men to stand up in a boat's
far North, be it remembered, where beer agrees well with the constitution;
features.  But to a large and thorough sweeping comprehension of him, it
fishery.  In the first place, the amount of butter, and Texel and Leyden
harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his boat; and grievous loss
head, and take good aim at flying whales; this would seem somewhat
improbable.  Yet they did aim at them, and hit them too.  But this was very
inferior article). 550 ankers of Geneva. 10,800 barrels of beer.  Most
is very large, 10,800 barrels.  Now, as those polar fisheries could only be
learned Low Dutch book treated of the commerce of Holland; and, among other
list of the outfits for the larders and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen;
livers; and that the English whalers have not neglected so excellent an
might ensue to Nantucket and New Bedford.  But no more; enough has been said
natives pledge each other in bumpers of train oil.  The quantity of beer, too,
not mean The Cooper, but The Merchant.  In short, this ancient and
nothing better out of the world, get a good dinner out of it, at least.  And
of gin.  Now, whether these gin and beer harpooneers, so fuddled as one might
of my own, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, etc., consumed by
one of these Dutch whalemen, including the short voyage to and from the
outer aspect; or separately and in detail upon some few interior structural
profound
prosecuted in the short summer of that climate, so that the whole cruise of
researches in the leviathanic histories, I stumbled upon an ancient Dutch
statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading; not so in the present
subjects, contained a very interesting account of its whale fishery.  And in
that it was the production of one Fitz Swackhammer.  But my friend Dr.
the studious digesting of all this beer, beef, and bread, during which many
therefore, I say, we have precisely two barrels of beer per man, for a
this chapter it was, headed Smeer, or Fat, that I found a long detailed
this empties the decanter.
thoughts were incidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental
to each of their fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all;
to show that the old Dutch whalers of two or three centuries ago were high
translation, giving him a box of sperm candles for his trouble -- this same
treating of the Sperm Whale, I have chiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his
twelve weeks' allowance, exclusive of his fair proportion of that 550 ankers
unctuous natures, being rendered still more unctuous by the nature of their
upon the Equator, in our southern fishery, beer would be apt to make the
vocation, and especially by their pursuing their game in those frigid Polar
volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it, I knew must be about
whale ship must carry its cooper.  I was reinforced in this opinion by seeing
whalers.  The title was, Dan Coopman, wherefore I concluded that this must
which is here pointed out, and will be still further elucidated.  During my
--spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan --and swing all day upon his lower
.. <p 448 >
.. <p 449 >
.. <p 449 >
Cutting me a green measuring-rod, I once more dived within the skeleton.
From their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests perceived me taking the
Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep at the whispering gallery
admeasurement of the whale.
admeasurements.  These admeasurements I now propose to set before you.  But
afar.  Now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood, the
altitude of the final rib.  How now!  they shouted; Dar'st thou measure
and begat him curly-headed glories.  Now, when with royal Tranquo I visited
and following it back, I emerged from the opening where I entered.  I saw no
and fro I paced before this skeleton --brushed the vines aside --broke through
ascending from where the real jet had issued, I marvelled that the king
cerebellum; and sixpence for the unrivalled view from his forehead.  The
constable by name, a certain sir clifford constable has in his possession the
copied verbatim from my right arm, where I had them tattooed; as in my wild
deafened; and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that
ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed around him, the mighty
every month assuming greener, fresher verdure; but himself a skeleton.  Life
fancied measurement I please.  Because there are skeleton authorities you can
first, be it recorded, that, in this matter, I am not free to utter any
folded Death; Death trellised Life; the grim god wived with youthful Life,
footman will show round future visitors with a bunch of keys at his side.
full-grown magnitude of my friend King Tranquo's.  In both cases, the stranded
great chest of drawers, you can open and shut him, in all his bony cavities
great, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging --a gigantic idler!  Yet, as the
have villanies been detected.  Ah, mortal!  then, be heedful; for so, in all
idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself all woven over with the vines;
in Hull, England, one of the whaling ports of that country, where they have
in the spinal column; threepence to hear the echo in the hollow of his
inches; they cracked each other's sconces with their yard-sticks -- the great
its many winding, shaded collonades and arbors.  But soon my line was out;
jaw.  Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors and shutters; and a
least, what untattooed parts might remain --I did not trouble myself with the
living thing within; naught was there but bones.
marvelled that the priests should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine.  To
no mortal voice; and by that humming, we, too, who look on the loom are
odd inches; nor, indeed, should inches at all enter into a congenial
parts of my body to remain a blank page for a poem I was then composing --at
parts.  Sir Clifford's whale has been articulated throughout; so that, like a
plainly heard without the walls, bursting from the opened casements.  Thereby
proprietors call the only perfect specimen of a Greenland or River Whale in
refer to, to test my accuracy.  There is a Leviathanic Museum, they tell me,
should regard a chapel as an object of vertu.  He laughed.  But more I
skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are
skeleton of a Sperm Whale, but of moderate size, by no means of the
skull echoed --and seizing that lucky chance, I quickly concluded my own
some fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales.  Likewise, I have heard
speak through it.  For even so it is in all material factories.  The spoken
that in the museum of Manchester, in New Hampshire, they have what the
the United States.  Moreover, at a place in Yorkshire, England, Burton
the ribs --and with a ball of Arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied long amid
their proprietors upon similar grounds.  King Tranquo seizing his because he
then?  But hereupon a fierce contest rose among them, concerning feet and
this din of the great world's loom, thy subtlest thinkings may be overheard
this our god!  That's for us.  Aye, priests --well, how long do ye make him,
this wondrous whale, and saw the skull an altar, and the artificial smoke
valuable statistics.  But as I was crowded for space, and wished the other
wanderings at that period, there was no other secure way of preserving such
wanted it; and Sir Clifford, because he was lord of the seignories of those
whales to which these two skeletons belonged, were originally claimed by
words that are inaudible among the flying spindles; those same words are


     Friends, hold my arms!  For in the mere act of penning my thoughts of this
     From his mighty bulk the whale
.. < chapter civ 30  THE FOSSIL WHALE >
.. <p 451 >
.. <p 452 >
.. <p 453 >
But when Leviathan is the text, the case is altered.  Fain am I to stagger to
Fossil Whales, I present my credentials as a geologist, by stating that in my
Leviathan, it behoves me to approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the
Leviathan, they weary me, and make me faint with their out-reaching
Likewise, by way of preliminary, I desire to remind the reader, that while
There are forty and odd vertebrae in all, which in the skeleton are not
Thus we see how that the spine of even the hugest of living things tapers off
a flea --such portly terms might justly be deemed unwarrantably grandiloquent.
affords a most congenial theme whereon to enlarge, amplify, and generally
almost completely extinct; the subsequent relics discovered in what are
and throughout the whole universe, not excluding its suburbs.  Such, and so
at last into simple child's play.
bulk.  To produce a mighty book, you must choose a
called the Tertiary formations seem the connecting, or at any rate
capitals.  Give me a condor's quill!  Give me Vesuvius' crater for an inkstand!
comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include the whole circle of the
ditches, canals, and wells, wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts.
enterprise; not overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood, and
expatiate.  Would you, you could not compress him.  By good rights he
expressly purchased for that purpose; because that famous lexicographer's
furlongs from spiracle to tail, and the yards he measures about the waist;
him in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities, it now
him like great cables and hausers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck
his angry flukes; only on the profound unbounded sea, can the fully invested
in the earlier geological strata there are found the fossils of monsters now
in width something less than three feet, and in depth more than four.  The
intercepted links, between the antichronical creatures, and those whose
locked together.  They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks on a Gothic
magnifying, is the virtue of a large and liberal theme!  We expand to its
mighty theme.  No great and enduring volume can ever be written on the flea,
miscellaneous time i have been a stone-mason, and also a great digger of
of a line-of-battle-ship.  Since I have undertaken to manhandle this
only think of the gigantic involutions of his intestines, where they lie in
point of view.  Applied to any other creature than the Leviathan --to an ant or
present, and to come, with all the revolving panoramas of empire on earth,
remains to magnify him in an archaeological, fossiliferous, and antediluvian
remote posterity are said to have entered the Ark; all the Fossil Whales
said, that whenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of
sciences, and all the generations of whales, and men, and mastodons, past,
should only be treated of in imperial folio.  Not to tell over again his
smallest, where the spine tapers away into the tail, is only two inches in
speedy enterprise.  But now it's done, it looks much like Pompey's Pillar.
spinning him out to the uttermost coil of his bowels.  Having already described
spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry.  The largest, a middle one, is
their subject, though it may seem but an ordinary one.  How, then, with me,
these dissertations, I have invariably used a huge quarto edition of Johnson,
this emprise under the weightiest words of the dictionary.  And here be it
though many there be who have tried it.  Ere entering upon the subject of
uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile a lexicon to be used by a
urchins, the priest's children, who had stolen them to play marbles with.
we can consider it is, with a crane, to pile its bones high up on end.  No
were still smaller ones, but they had been lost by some little cannibal
whale author like me.  One often hears of writers that rise and swell with
whale be truly and livingly found out.  But the spine.  For that, the best way
width, and looks something like a white billiard-ball.  I was told that there
writing of this Leviathan?  Unconsciously my chirography expands into placard





     Inasmuch, then, as this Leviathan comes floundering down upon us from the
     but of the whales found in that
     elaborate history of whales, in the very beginning of his work (page 3),
     hundred feet in length --Rope Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales!  And even in
     there.
(reydan-siskur, or Wrinkled Bellies) at one hundred and twenty yards; that
.  But
.. < chapter cv 24 DOES THE WHALE'S MAGNITUDE DIMINISH? WILL HE PERISH? >
.. <p 455 >
.. <p 456 >
.. <p 457 >
People imagine, that by a secret Power bestowed by God upon the Temple, no
Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle, which lying upon the Ground with
Sperm Whales have been captured near a hundred feet long at the time of
Tertiary system, those belonging to its latter formations exceed in size
Whale can pass it without immediate death.  But the truth of the Matter is,
advance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods; may it
all this, I will not admit that of all animals the whale alone should have
and the ancient naturalists generally.  For Pliny tells us of whales that
as his ancestors in Pliny's time.  And if ever I go where Pliny is, I, a
cannot understand how it is, that while the Egyptian mummies that were buried
capture.  But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are an
conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts of such gentlemen as Pliny,
degenerated.  But still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the
embraced acres of living bulk, and Aldrovandus of others which measured eight
exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh's fat kine; in the face of
have layn there a hundred Years before I saw it.  Their Historians affirm,
head-waters of the Eternities, it may be fitly inquired, whether, in the
high-bred, stall-fed, prize cattle of Smithfield, not only equal, but far
in the Tertiary system (embracing a distinct geological period prior to man),
is, three hundred and sixty feet.  And Lacepede, the French naturalist, in his
its convex part uppermost, makes an Arch, the Head of which cannot be
large sized modern whale.  And I have heard, on whalemen's authority, that
less than seventy feet in length in the skeleton.  Whereas, we have already
long course of his generations, he has not degenerated from the original bulk
not be, that since Adam's time they have degenerated?  Assuredly, we must
not stand to assert, that the Prophet Jonas was cast forth by the Whale at
of a monstrous size are oftentimes cast up dead upon that shore.  The Common
of his sires.  But upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales of
of the Academy of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales
other animals sculptured on the oldest Egyptian and Nineveh tablets, by the
reached by a Man upon a Camel's Back.  This Rib (says John Leo) is said to
reader, and if you be a Nantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship
relative proportions in which they are drawn, just as plainly prove that the
seen, that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeleton of a
sets down the Right Whale at one hundred metres, three hundred and
that a Prophet who prophesy'd of Mahomet, came from this Temple, and some do
that on either side of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot two Miles into
the Base of the Temple.  In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you,
the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon 'em.  They keep a Whale's
the days of Banks and Solander, Cooke's naturalists, we find a Danish member
the largest is the Alabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that was
the present day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains are found
their coffins as a modern Kentuckian in his socks; and while the cattle and
those of its earlier ones.  Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far
thousands of years before even Pliny was born, do not measure so much in
twenty-eight feet.  And this work was published so late as A. D.
whaleman (more than he was), will make bold to tell him so.  Because I
will any whaleman believe these stories?  No.  The whale of to-day is as big





     The precipitating manner in which Captain
     both the ancestry and posterity of Grief go further than the ancestry and
     elephants;
     mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget to themselves an eternally
     which have now been hunted for thousands of years, by Semiramis, by Porus,
.. < chapter cvi 29  AHAB'S LEG >
.. <p 459 >
.. <p 459 >
.. <p 460 >
Ahab had quitted the Samuel Enderby of London, had not been unattended with
Isles of the sea combined.  Moreover: we are to consider, that from the
Noah's flood, he despised Noah's Ark; and if ever the world is to be again
account the whale immortal in his species, however perishable in his
adult generations must be contemporary.  And what that is, we may soon gain
appearances lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.  And,
by hannibal, and by all the successive monarchs of the East --if they still
century and more, therefore at any one period of time, several distinct
certain canonic teachings, that while some natural enjoyments here shall have
command to the steersman (it was, as ever, something about his not steering
cured.  Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind, that all
dead bone upon which he partly stood.  For it had not been very long prior to
displaced, that it had stake-wise smitten, and all but pierced his groin;
do naturally beget their like.  Yea, more than equally, thought Ahab; since
flood, spout his frothed defiance to the skies.
flooded, like the Netherlands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale
followed by the joy-childlessness of all hell's despair; whereas, some guilty
former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as the most poisonous
his own pivot-hole there, he so vehemently wheeled round with an urgent
hunting, since he has a pasture to expatiate in, which is precisely twice as
indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all his pervading, mad
individuality.  He swam the seas before the continents broke water; he once
inexplicable, unimaginable casualty, his ivory limb having been so violently
inflexibly enough); then, the already shaken ivory received such an additional
large as all Asia, both Americas, Europe and Africa, New Holland, and all the
no children born to them for the other world, but, on the contrary, shall be
nor was it without extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely
of creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men, women, and children
posterity of Joy.  For, not to hint of this: that it is an inference from
present human population of the globe.  Wherefore, for all these things, we
presumed great longevity of whales, their probably attaining the age of a
progressive progeny of griefs beyond the grave; not at all to hint of this,
prone upon the ground, and insensible; by some unknown, and seemingly
received a half-splintering shock.  And when after gaining his own deck, and
recklessness, Ahab did at times give careful heed to the condition of that
reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as inevitably as the sweetest
some idea of, by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries, and family vaults
some small violence to his own person.  He had lighted with such energy upon a
songster of the grove; so, equally with every felicity, all miserable events
survive there in great numbers, much more may the great whale outlast all
swam over the site of the Tuileries, and Windsor Castle, and the Kremlin.  In
temperate climes.  And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants,
that in those regions elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the
the Pequod's sailing from Nantucket, that he had been found one night lying
the anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct issue of a
there still seems an inequality in the deeper analysis of the thing.  For,
thwart of his boat that his ivory leg had
twist and wrench, that though it still remained entire, and to all
who were alive seventy-five years ago; and adding this countless host to the
will still survive, and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorial



     during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastle of Noah's ark.  Was it
     multum in parvo, Sheffield contrivances, assuming the exterior -- though a
     the carpenter makes a pagoda-looking cage for it.  An oarsman sprains his
.. <p 463 >
.. <p 464 >
accomplished, and with such liveliness of expertness in him, too; all this
accounted bits of ivory; heads he deemed but top-blocks; men themselves he
all-ramifying heartlessness; --yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an old,
and fro, not only had gathered no moss; but what is more, had rubbed off
babe; living without premeditated reference to this world or the next.  You
big vice of wood, the carpenter symmetrically supplies the constellation.  A
both useful and capricious.  The one grand stage where he enacted all his
brain, if he had ever had one, must have early oozed along into the muscles of
carpenter for a screw-driver, all they had to do was to open that part of
clean shaved rods of right-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory,
crutch-like, antediluvian, wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked now and then
deaf and dumb, spontaneous literal process.  He was a pure manipulator; his
ears.  Another has the toothache: the carpenter out pincers, and clapping
eyes in the deck, or new tree-nails in the side planks, and other
found too large to be easily inserted into its hole: the carpenter claps it
furnished with several vices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of
half-horrible stolidity in him, involving, too, as it appeared, an
handle of his wooden vice, the carpenter signs him to clap his jaw in that,
his fingers.  He was like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful,
if he would have him draw the tooth.  Thus, this carpenter was prepared at all
ignores you, though you dig foundations for cathedrals.  Yet was this
into one of his ever-ready vices, and straightway files it smaller.  A lost
land-bird of strange plumage strays on board, and is made a captive: out of
lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works.  A belaying pin is
lightly held for capstans.  But while now upon so wide a field thus variously
little swelled --of a common pocket knife; but containing, not only blades of
mechanical emergencies continually recurring in a large ship, upon a three
might almost say, that this strange uncompromisedness in him involved a sort
miscellaneous matters more directly pertaining to his special business; he
much by reason or by instinct, or simply because he had been tutored to it,
of his readiness in ordinary duties: --repairing stove boats, sprung spars,
of unintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did not seem to work so
one hand upon his bench bids him be seated there; but the poor fellow
or by any intermixture of all these, even or uneven; but merely by a kind of
or four years' voyage, in uncivilized and far-distant seas.  For not to speak
pauselessly active in uncounted modes, still eternally holds its peace, and
points, and alike indifferent and without respect in all.  Teeth he
reforming the shape of clumsy-bladed oars, inserting bull's
rulers, nail-filers, counter-sinkers.  So, if his superiors wanted to use the
sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings: the carpenter drills his
so.  For nothing was this man more remarkable, than for a certain impersonal
stars to be painted upon the blade of his every oar; screwing each oar in his
stolidity as it were; impersonal, I say; for it so shaded off into the
stolidity discernible in the whole visible world; which while
surrounding infinite of things, that it seemed one with the general
that this old carpenter had been a life-long wanderer, whose much rolling, to
unmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation; whirling round the
various parts so manifold, was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table
various sizes, but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweezers, awls, pens,
was a stript abstract; an unfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born
was moreover unhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes,
whatever small outward clingings might have originally pertained to him?  He
with a certain grizzled wittiness; such as might have served to pass the time
wood.  At all times except when whales were alongside, this bench was securely
would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence.  But not precisely
wrist: the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion.  Stubb longed for vermillion



     Hist, then.  How dost thou know that some entire, living, thinking thing may
     his work).  Well, well, well!  Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb
     there to a hair, do I. Is't a riddle?  I should humbly call it a poser, sir.
'Tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here's one.  No, no,
(turns to go).  Oh, Life!  Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet standing
--oh!  ah! --I guess so; so; --yes, yes --oh dear!  Look ye, carpenter, I dare say
.. <p 467 >
.. <p 468 >
.. <p 469 >
I mean.  Canst thou not drive that old Adam away?  Truly, sir, I begin to
That's mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.  The fellow's impious!  What art
There, take the order, and away.  Now, what's he speaking about, and who's he
air; and I'm down in the whole world's books.  I am so rich, I could have
always says he's queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word
and, I may say, an extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here,
brag with.  By heavens!  I'll get a crucible, and into it, and dissolve
calculate over again; I think I didn't carry a small figure, sir.  Look ye,
carpenter; --or would'st thou rather work in clay?  Sir? --Clay?  clay, sir?
debtor to this blockhead for a bone to stand on!  Cursed be that mortal
done?  Perhaps an hour, sir.  Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me
empire (which was the world's); and yet I owe for the flesh in the tongue I
feel the smart of my crushed leg, though it be now so long dissolved; then,
feet through the wrist; no heart at all, brass forehead, and about a
for, man?  thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.  i thought, sir,
given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at the auction of the Roman
here's his leg!  Yes, now that I think of it, here's his bedfellow!  has a
inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers.  I would be free as
it into Mr. Starbuck all the time -- queer, sir --queer, queer, very queer.  And
it speak thoroughly well for thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg
looked so scornful at me!  I'm a sort of strange-thoughted
mine once was; so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye,
myself down to one small, compendious vertebra.  So.  Carpenter ( resuming
no; I must have a lantern.  Ho, ho!  That's it, hey?  Here are two, sir; one
not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely where thou now
old body like me, should never undertake to wade out into deep waters with
outwards?  No, but put a sky-light on top of his head to illuminate inwards.
place with it; that is, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one,
pudding-heads should never grant premises. --How long before this leg is
quarter of an acre of fine brains; and let me see --shall I order eyes to see
queer; he's queer, says Stubb; he's queer--queer, queer; and keeps dinning
really so, sir?  It is, man.  Look, put thy live leg here in the place where
sir; how that a dismasted man never entirely loses the feeling of his old
sometimes, they say; but that's only haphazard-like.  Then, a short, little
spar, but it will be still pricking him at times.  May I humbly ask if it be
speaking to, I should like to know?  Shall I keep standing here? ( aside).
standest; aye, and standing there in thy spite?  In thy most solitary hours,
stick of whale's jaw-bone for a wife!  And this is his leg; he'll stand on
tall, heron-built captains; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick,
that you spoke to carpenter.  Carpenter?  why that's --but no; --a very tidy,
then, dost thou not fear eavesdroppers?  Hold, don't speak!  And if I still
this.  What was that now about one leg standing in three places, and all
thou callest thyself a right good workmanlike workman, eh!  Well, then, will
thou makest, I shall nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical
thou sneezing about?  Bone is rather dusty, sir.  Take the hint, then; and
three places standing in one hell --how was that?  Oh!  I don't wonder he
understand somewhat now.  Yes, I have heard something curious on that score,
when thou art dead, never bury thyself under living people's noses.  Sir?
why mayest not thou, carpenter, feel the fiery pains of hell for ever, and
will serve my turn.  What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face
without a body?  Hah!  Good Lord!  Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must
yet two to the soul.  Where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there,


     Be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;
     Upon searching, it was found
.. < chapter cx 4  QUEEQUEG IN HIS COFFIN >
.. <p 469n. >
.. <p 472 >
.. <p 472 >
.. <p 473 >
Ahab thus acted.  It may have been a flash of honesty in him; or mere
Burtons were hoisted.
In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board, it is a
Queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought him nigh to his endless end.
South-Sea-men's cabin furniture), and pointing it towards Starbuck,
about; and the hollow hull echoed under foot, as if you were treading over
and deeper, disturbing the slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from
any serious leakage in the precious cargo.
back the main-yard; up Burtons, and break out in the main-hold.  It were
beware of thyself, old man.  He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most
by the changed character of the withdrawn water, the mariners readily detect
careful bravery that!  murmured Ahab, as Starbuck disappeared.  What's that
cask containing coins of Captain Noah, with copies of the posted placards,
casks with sea-water; which afterwards, at varying intervals, is removed by
chief
crew: Furl the t'gallant-sails and close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft;
deep did they go; and so ancient, and corroded, and weedy the aspect of the
demijohn.  Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle
dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Captain, the higher
disembowelled, you should have stooped over the hatchway, and peered down
elsewhere seen -- mount his dead back in a rolling sea; and finally descend
empty catacombs, and reeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted
exclaimed: There is one God that is Lord over the earth, and one Captain
fellow, Starbuck, he said lowly to the mate; then raising his voice to the
he half calmly rose, and as he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant and
he said --Ahab beware of Ahab --there's something there!  Then unconsciously
holders, so called.  Poor Queequeg!  when the ship was about half
hoops, were hoisted out, till at last the piled decks were hard to get
in his head.  Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.  Now, at
into the gloom of the hold, and bitterly sweating all day in that
leak must be further off.  So, it being calm weather, they broke out deeper
little cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed, and
lowermost puncheons, that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone
must not only face all the rage of the living whale, but --as we have
of the mate, and his fiery cheeks, you would have almost thought that he had
officer of his ship.  However it was, his orders were executed; and the
perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that as respecting Starbuck,
prudential policy which, under the circumstance, imperiously forbade the
really received the blaze of the levelled tube.  But, mastering his emotion,
regular semi-weekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold, and drench the
returning the gun to the rack, he went to the deck.  Thou art but too good a
said: Thou hast outraged, not insulted me, Sir; but for that I ask thee not
slightest symptom of open disaffection, however transient, in the important
subterraneous confinement, resolutely manhandle the clumsiest casks and see
that black midnight sending those gigantic moles into the daylight above.  So
that is lord over the Pequod. --On deck!  For an instant in the flashing eyes
that the casks last struck into the hold were perfectly sound, and that the
the ship's pumps.  Hereby the casks are sought to be kept damply tight; while
this time it was that my poor pagan companion, and fast bosom-friend,
to beware of Starbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahab beware of Ahab;
to their stowage.  To be short, among whalemen, the harpooneers are the
too, of water, and bread, and beef, and shooks of staves, and iron bundles of
using the musket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the
vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood.  Tierce after tierce,
you rise the harder you toil.  So with poor Queequeg, who, as harpooneer,




     Poor rover!  will ye never have done with all this weary roving?  Where go ye
     Rarmai (it will do; it is easy), he murmured at last, and signed to be
     and thereupon, when some expressed their delighted surprise, he, in
     be instantly brought to him, nor was there any denying him; seeing that, of
.. <p 476 >
Antilles.  If ye find him, then comfort him; for he must be very sad; for
Hark ye; if ye find Pip, tell all the Antilles he's a runaway; a coward, a
Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream.  Pip was led away, and the
Queequeg suddenly rallied; soon there seemed no need of the carpenter's box:
Queequeg, die; and I'll beat ye your dying march.  I have heard, murmured
Starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, that in violent fevers, men, all
a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for a pillow, Queequeg now entreated to
across here. --Rig-a-dig, dig, dig!  huzza!  Oh for a game cock now to sit upon
all mortals, some dying men are the most tyrannical; and certainly, since they
ancient tongues had been really spoken in their hearing by some lofty
and two!  Let's make a General of him!  Ho, where's his harpoon?  Lay it
any it had.  He lay without moving a few minutes, then told one to go to his
are only beat with water-lilies, will ye do one little errand for me?  Seek
away, Queequeg, to every one's consternation, commanded that the thing should
bag and bring out his little god, Yojo.  Then crossing his arms on his breast
be lifted into his final bed, that he might make trial of its comforts, if
but base little Pip, he died a coward; died all a'shiver; --out upon Pip!
coward, a coward!  Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat!  I'd never beat my
critical moment, he had just recalled a little duty ashore, which he was
die yet, he averred.  They asked him, then, whether to live or die was a
drawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffin along with one
every preparation for death; now that his coffin was proved a good fit,
half-humorous cries with which the people on deck began to drive the coffin
he's left his tambourine behind; --I found it.  Rig-a-dig, dig, dig!  Now,
head, and a small bag of woody earth scraped up in the hold at the foot; and
here.  No, no!  shame upon all cowards --shame upon them!  Let 'em go drown
his head and crow!  queequeg dies game! --mind ye that; queequeg dies game! --
hovering near by all this while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with
ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues; and that when the mystery is
indulged.  Leaning over in his hammock, Queequeg long regarded the coffin
lay Queequeg in his coffin with little but his composed countenance in view.
leaving undone; and therefore had changed his mind about dying: he could not
like Pip, that jumped from a whale-boat.  Shame!  shame!  During all this,
look!
lunacy, brings heavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes.  Where learned he
matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure.  He answered, certainly.  In a
now?  But if the currents carry ye to those sweet Antilles where the beaches
of the paddles of his boat.  All by his own request, also, biscuits were
out one Pip, who's now been missing long: I think he's in those far
placed over him.  The head part turned over with a leather hinge, and there
probed, it turns out always that in their wholly forgotten childhood those
replaced in his hammock.  But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily
scholars.  So, to my fond faith, poor Pip, in this strange sweetness of his
sick man was replaced in his hammock.  But now that he had apparently made
soft sobbings, took him by the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine.
substance, said, that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this; --at a
take ye good heed of that; Queequeg dies game!  I say; game, game, game!
tambourine over base Pip, and hail him General, if he were once more dying
that, but there? --Hark!  he speaks again: but more wildly now.  Form two
then ranged round the sides within: a flask of fresh water was placed at the
were ready for it yet in that direction.  Overhearing the indignant but
will shortly trouble us so little for evermore, the poor fellows ought to be
with Yojo between, he called for the coffin lid (hatch he called it) to be
with an attentive eye.  He then called for his harpoon, had the wooden stock
word, it was Queequeg's conceit, that if a man



     The blacksmith availing himself of the mild,
     had the young and loving healthy wife listened with no unhappy nervousness,
     story of his wretched fate.  Belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter's
.. < chapter cxii 13  THE BLACKSMITH >
.. <p 479 >
.. <p 480 >
.. <p 481 >
A peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painful appearing yawing
Death plucked down some virtuous elder brother, on whose whistling daily toil
Labor's iron lullaby, the blacksmith's infants were rocked to slumber.  Oh,
Nevertheless, this old man's was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm.
No murmur, no impatience, no petulence did come from him.  Silent, slow, and
acts of the gladness, and the one long, and as yet uncatastrophied fifth act
and lances, and jealously watching his every sooty movement, as he toiled.
and walls, came up to her, not unsweetly, in her nursery; and so, to stout
away, as if toil were life itself, and the heavy beating of his hammer the
basement of his dwelling, but with a separate entrance to it; so that always
begrimed, blistered old blacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to
both feet.  Out of this revelation, part by part, at last came out the four
burglar into his family's heart.  It was the Bottle Conjuror!  Upon the opening
burglar slid into his happy home, and robbed them all of everything.  And
but with vigorous pleasure, to the stout ringing of her young-armed old
called ruin.  He had been an artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty to
cheerful-looking church, planted in a grove.  But one night, under cover of
circle, all waiting to be served; holding boat-spades, pike-heads, harpoons,
cruising-ground, the old man's purpose intensified itself.  His firm lips met
darker yet to tell, the blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this
darkness, and further concealed in a most cunning disguisement, a desperate
delicious grief, and her orphans a truly venerable, legendary sire to dream
do; owned a house and garden; embraced a youthful, daughter-like, loving
easier to harvest.  Why tell the whole?  The blows of the basement hammer
finally given in; and so it came to pass that every one now knew the shameful
for prudent, most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith's shop was in the
for the peculiarly active pursuits shortly to be anticipated, Perth, the
had the young widow had a
half-stupidly felt the deadly numbness stealing over him, and sought refuge
heavy beating of his heart.  And so it was. --Most miserable!
hull, Stern all!  the White Whale spouts thick blood!
husband's hammer; whose reverberations, muffled by passing through the floors
in a leaning, dilapidated barn.  The issue was, the loss of the extremities of
in his gait, had at an early period of the voyage excited the curiosity of
like the lips of a vice; the Delta of his forehead's veins swelled like
midnight, on the road running between two country towns, the blacksmith
nearly sixty, had postponedly encountered that thing in sorrow's technicals
now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers, and bowsmen
of in their after years; and all of them a care-killing competency.  But
of that fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home.  Now,
of the grief of his life's drama.  He was an old man, who, at the age of
overladen brooks; in his very sleep, his ringing cry ran through the vaulted
solely hung the responsibilities of some other family, and left the worse
solemn; bowing over still further his chronically broken back, he toiled
still retained it on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast; being
summer-cool weather that now reigned in these latitudes, and in preparation
taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin came upon him, then
than useless old man standing, till the hideous rot of life should make him
the hold again, after concluding his contributory work for Ahab's leg, but
the mariners.  And to the importunity of their persisted questionings he had
to do some little job for them; altering, or repairing, or new shaping their
various weapons and boat furniture.  Often he would be surrounded by an eager
wife, and three blithe, ruddy children; every Sunday went to a
woe on woe!  Oh, Death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?  Hadst thou



     What's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?  muttered Stubb,
     and Ahab moodily stalked away with the weapon; the sound of his ivory leg,
     of hickory, with the bark still investing it, Ahab fitted the end to the
--but here --to work!  Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by
.. <p 484 >
.. <p 485 >
Daggoo!  What say ye, pagans!  Will ye give me as much blood as will cover
God, not that; yet I fear something, Captain Ahab.  Is not this harpoon for
Perth to the shank, the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as the
This done, pole, iron, and rope --like the Three Fates --remained inseparable,
and the hard pressed forge shooting up its intense straight flame, the Parsee
and the sound of the hickory pole, both hollowly ringing along every plank.
anvil.  Look ye, blacksmith, these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel
aside.
at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one, by spiralling
baptismal blood.  Now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one
begin welding the twelve into one, when Ahab stayed his hand, and said he
blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would fain not use them.  Take them,
blacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat, prior to tempering
bones of murderers.  Quick!  forge me the harpoon.  And forge me first, twelve
braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon; the pole was then driven
deliriously howled Ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured the
extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spread yarns were all
gaffs and pikes to-day.  Look ye here!  jingling the leathern bag, as if it
hard up into the socket; from the lower end the rope was traced half way along
hast here, then, the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work.  I
hummed like a harp-string, then eagerly bending over it, and seeing no
into Ahab's bent face.  Would'st thou brand me, Perth?  wincing for a moment
it all hissing into the cask of water near by, the scalding steam shot up
know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue from the melted
like his own fin-bone.  There's the stuff, flinging the pouch upon the
like the yarns and strands of a tow-line.  Quick!  I'll blow the fire.  When
looking on from the forecastle.  That Parsee smells fire like a fusee; and
make them thyself, man.  Here are my razors --the best of steel; here, and make
man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave, sup, nor pray till
of it taken to the windlass, and
of my skull -- that is all wrinkles!  But, away with child's play; no more
on the anvil, Perth passing to him the glowing rods, one after the other,
one complete rod, received its final heat; and as perth, to temper it, plunged
passed silently, and bowing over his head towards the fire, seemed invoking
punctures were made in the heathen flesh, and the White Whale's barbs were
rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, and hammer these twelve together
shoes of racing horses.  Horse-shoe stubbs, sir?  Why, Captain Ahab, thou
smells of it himself, like a hot musket's powder-pan.  At last the shank, in
socket of the iron.  A coil of new tow-line was then unwound, and some fathoms
some curse or some blessing on the toil.  But, as Ahab looked up, he slid
strandings, ahab exclaimed, good!  and now for the seizings.  At one
stretched to a great tension.  Pressing his foot upon it, till the rope
that; I want it of the true death-temper.  Ahoy, there!  Tashtego, Queequeg,
the White Whale?  For the white fiend!  But now for the barbs; thou must
the barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea.  For a moment, the old
the last one.  Work that over again, Perth.  This done, Perth was about to
the pole's length, and firmly secured so, with intertwistings of twine.
them, he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near.  No, no --no water for
them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt.  A flaw!  rejecting
then tempered.  Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!
this barb?  holding it high up.  A cluster of dark nods replied, Yes.  Three
were full of gold coins.  I, too, want a harpoon made; one that a thousand
with the pain; have I been but forging my own branding-iron, then?  Pray
would weld his own iron.  As, then, with regular, gasping hems, he hammered
yoke of fiends could not part, Perth; something that will stick in a whale



     And jolly enough were
     Come aboard, come aboard!  cried the gay Bachelor's commander, lifting a
     and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion.  And Ahab, he
     bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last whale they had slain.
.. <p 488 >
.. <p 489 >
Bachelor, which had just wedged in her last cask of oil, and bolted down her
Hast lost any men?  Not enough to speak of --two islanders, that's all; --but
Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the ship's
Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colors were flying from her rigging, on
You would have almost thought they were pulling down the cursed Bastile, such
afterwards learned, the bachelor had met with the most surprising success;
all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the same seas numerous
an oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece.  In the forecastle,
at the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots had been removed.
barrels of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slender
boiler, and filled it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and
breakers of the
brow.  Come along, will ye (merry's the play); a full ship and
bursting hatches; and now, in glad holiday apparel, was joyously, though
captain's and officers' staterooms.  Even the cabin table itself had been
captain's pantaloons pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his hands into,
captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast of the scene.
come aboard, old hearty, come along.  I'll soon take that black from your
drums came from her forecastle; and drawing still nearer, a crowd of her men
elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him,
every side.  Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two
filled it; that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and
filled them; that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the
firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long Island
for things passed, the other all forebodings as to things to come --their two
from the ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in the
glass and a bottle in the air.  Hast seen the White Whale?  gritted Ahab in
gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other's wakes --one all jubilations
good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the barbarian sound of enormous
had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the far more
hilarious jig.  Meanwhile, others of the ship's company were tumultuously busy
in self-complacent testimony of his entire satisfaction.  As this glad ship of
into the sea.
it was humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on his largest
knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of
mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at their hats; from the
mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped
negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding over the
other good-humoredly.  Come aboard!  Thou are too damned jolly.  Sail on.
other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish.  Not only
parchment-like poke or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a loud roar
reply.  No; only heard of him; but don't believe in him at all, said the
same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck was a brazen lamp.  As was
somewhat vain-gloriously, sailing round among the widely-separated ships on
stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down; and hanging captive from the
the ground, previous to pointing her prow for home.  The three men at her
the sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filled them;
the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before the wind, some few
to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew.  On the quarter-deck, the
too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black, with a stubborn
valuable sperm, but additional supplemental casks had been bartered for,
weeks after Ahab's harpoon had been welded.  It was a Nantucket ship, the
were seen standing round her huge try-pots, which, covered with the
wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and mortar were being hurled
with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented boat,




     The season for the Line at length drew
     Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot!  I have here two pledges
     was kneeling beneath him on the ship's deck, and with face thrown up like
-- Hemp only can kill thee.  The gallows, ye mean. --I am immortal then, on
--a hearse and its plumes floating over the ocean with the waves for the
.. < chapter cxviii 2  THE QUADRANT >
.. <p 492 >
.. <p 493 >
Ahab's, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy
The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale's spout-hole; and the
and on sea!  Both were silent again, as one man.  The grey dawn came on, and
are none; the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is
as the insufferable splendors of God's throne.  Well that Ahab's quadrant
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture
black, glossy back, and far out upon the
boat that had killed it lay by its side all night; and that boat was Ahab's.
can follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still? --Was it not so?
centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the
crouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round
ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two hearses must verily be seen by thee
face, saw the Parsee; and hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed
fire.  So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its
had died wide apart; one, far to windward; one, less distant, to leeward;
hearses?  Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can be
high noon; and Ahab, seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was about
hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to an earthly
in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
land and on sea, cried Ahab, with a laugh of derision; -- Immortal on land
lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon the
last one must be grown in America.  Aye, aye!  a strange sight that, Parsee:
man, said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up like fire-flies in the gloom,
mariners quickly run to the braces, and would stand there with all their eyes
midnight waves, which gently chafed the whale's broad flank, like soft surf
near; and every day when Ahab, coming from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft,
nightfall; but the windward one could not be reached till morning; and the
ocean's immeasureable burning-glass.  The sky looks lacquered; clouds there
on the sea; the first not made by mortal hands; and the visible wood of the
one ahead; one astern.  These last three were brought alongside ere
pall-bearers.  Ha!  Such a sight we shall not soon see.  Believe it or not,
passionlessness.  At length the desired observation was taken; and with his
pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at
pilot.  And when thou art so gone before --if that ever befall --then ere I
precise meridian.  Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
ran shuddering through the air.  Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to
ship's prow for the equator.  In good time the order came.  It was hard upon
taking his wonted daily obervation of the sun to determine his latitude.  Now,
that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.  Take another pledge, old
the last men in a flooded world.  I have dreamed it again, said he.  Of the
the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah,
the slumbering crew arose from the boat's bottom, and ere noon the dead whale
the vigilant helmsman would ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager
the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails.  A sound like
thine?  And who are hearsed that die on the sea?  But I said, old man, that
thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.  And what was that saying about
thyself?  Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy
upon a beach.  Ahab and all his boat's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who
was brought to the ship.
was furnished with colored glasses, through which to take sight of that solar




     Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,
     but the sea will have its way.  Stubb, for one, can't fight it.  You see, Mr.
     is to run for Moby Dick?  the very course he swung to this day noon?  now
     markest thou not that the gale comes from the eastward, the very course Ahab
.. <p 496 >
.. <p 497 >
.. <p 498 >
Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at every
Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the
Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it leaps, all round the
Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his hand towards the weather bow,
Thunder!  said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-hole;
all their pains seemed naught.  Though lifted to the very top of the cranes,
anybody else, never mind how foolish?  Here!  cried Starbuck, seizing
because of all this, the lower parts of a ship's
boat's bottom at the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a
but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of fire.
carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water.  But as this
conductor must descend to considerable depth, that its end may avoid all
contact with the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly towing there, it
cried Starbuck, let the Typhoon sing, and strike his harp here in our
dashing high up against the reeling ship's high tetering side, stove in the
directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats.  But
drive us towards home.  Yonder, to windward, all is blackness of doom; but
flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disaster might
flip only foamin'; When he stirs in the spicin', -- Such a funny, sporty,
following the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same
fun: so the old song says; --( sings.) Oh!  jolly is the gale, And a joker
gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  Thunder splits the
have befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were
have to meet it, is just across the deck here.  But never mind; it's all in
he is wont to stand --his stand-point is stove, man!  Now jump overboard, and
in this world but to cut my throat.  And when that's done, ten to one I sing
instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.  Who's there?  Old
is the whale, A' flourishin' his tail, -- Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty,
joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  The scud all a flyin' That's his
keep up my spirits.  And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there's no way
lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are generally made in long
lightning.  At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness,
mark his boat there; where is that stove?  In the stern-sheets, man; where
none of thine own.  What!  how can you see better of a dark night than
not a brave man; never said i was a brave man; I am a coward; and I sing to
now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair wind that will
of the rigging, and more or less impeding the vessel's way in the water;
outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.  The rods!
perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships
rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace.  But I am
ships, But he only smacks his lips, A tastin' of this flip, -- Such a funny,
sieve.  Bad work, bad work!  Mr. Starbuck, said Stubb, regarding the wreck,
sing away, if thou must!  I don't half understand ye: what's in the wind?
slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up into the chains
soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb's question.  The gale that
sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!  Avast Stubb,
the rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport.
the windward quarter boat (Ahab's) did not escape.  A great rolling sea,
to leeward, homeward --I see it lightens up there; but not with the
to stop my singing
world it runs, and then comes the spring!  But as for me, all the start I
would be liable to many mishaps, besides interfering not a little with some
ye the doxology for a wind-up.  Madman!  look through my eyes if thou hast


     man!  Ahab's harpoon, the one forged at Perth's fire, remained firmly lashed
.. <p 501 >
.. <p 502 >
I own thy speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake
Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.  Thou canst consume; but I can then
[Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise to
ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some stunning
and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound.  And that ye may know to what
art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not.  Oh, cruel!  what hast
be ashes.  Take the homage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands.  I would
be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness leaping out of light,
beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun.  I know that of me, which thou
beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy eternity is but time, all
breath he extinguished the flame.  As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain,
but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to
crew instantly ran to the braces --though not a sail was left aloft.  For the
defiance.  To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind; and e'en for hate
drop off; and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of
end.  Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from the fiery dart
eyes do dimly see it.  Oh, thou foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou
go on a better voyage than this.  Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken
ground.  Oh, oh!  Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee.  Light though thou
haughty agony, i read my sire.  leap!  leap up, and lick the sky!  I leap
in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat's bow;
kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and
know thee, thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy right worship is
knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent.  There is some unsuffusing thing
leaping out of thee!  The javelins cease; open eyes; see, or not?  There burn
life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me.  In the midst
live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.  But
look ye here; thus I blow out the last fear!  And with one blast of his
madest me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee.
man; forbear!  t'is an ill voyage!  ill begun, ill continued; let me square
moment all the aghast mate's thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half
mutinous cry.  But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, and
not how came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten; certainly knowest not thy
not take it.  The lightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and
of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian once did worship, till in the
of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.  Though but a
pale, forked fire.  As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent's
point at best; whencesoe'er I came; wheresoe'er I go; yet while I earthly
right hand pressed hard upon them.] I own thy speechless, placeless power;
sacramental act so burned by thee, that to this hour I bear the scar; I now
said I not so?  Nor was it wrung from me; nor do I now drop these links.
snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them;
swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope's
that he held, the men fell back in dismay, and Ahab again spoke: -- All
that still remains indifferent.  Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou
the flames!  Oh, thou magnanimous!  now do I glory in my genealogy.  But thou
the yards, while we may, old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to
thou canst but kill; and all are killed.  No fearless fool now fronts thee.
thou done with her?  There lies my puzzle; but thine is greater.  Thou knowest
though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there's that in here
thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes, his
thy creativeness mechanical.  Through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched
tongue, Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm -- God, God is against thee, old
too hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief.  Here again with
tune this heart beats;
war is pain, and hate is woe.  Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will
with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee; defyingly I
worship thee!  The boat!  the boat!  cried Starbuck, look at thy boat, old
your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and heart, soul,





     During the most violent shocks of the
     Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly!  This is
     The
     wind!  oh-he-yo, cheerly, men!  the crew singing for joy, that so
     with the Pequod's; at almost every shock the helmsman had not failed to
.. < chapter cxxii 2  MIDNIGHT ALOFT--THUNDER AND LIGHTNING >
.. < chapter cxxiii 10  THE MUSKET >
.. <p 505 >
.. <p 505 >
.. <p 506 >
East-south-east --which he was to steer, if practicable, was once more given
Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of Ho!  the fair
Main-top-sail yard. --Tashtego passing new lashings around it.  Um, um, um.
Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
Stop that thunder!  Plenty too much thunder up here.  What's the use of
Typhoon, the man at the Pequod's jaw-bone tiller had several times been
a nasty night, lad.
according to its vicissitudes.  But as he was now bringing the ship as near
adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers
aft --the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut
an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed
apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance.  Ere knocking at his state-room, he
bird is on the wing.  The three corresponding new sails were now bent and
breeze --however reluctantly and gloomily, --than he mechanically went below to
but a tossed shuttle-cock to the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see
cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.  No more
down a beaver; so.  Halloa!  whew!  there goes my tarpaulin overboard; Lord,
hammer that knot down, and we've done.  So; next to touching land, lighting
her course as possible, watching the compass meanwhile, lo!  a good sign!
humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped round by all the roar of
immediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided change in
involuntarily paused before it a moment.  The cabin lamp --taking long swings
it.  In compliance with the standing order of his commander -- to report
long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat.  The tails
monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and drive
notice the whirling velocity with which they revolved upon the cards; it is a
of
of rum.  Um, um, um!
old man's bolted door, --a thin one, with fixed blinds inserted, in place of
on deck is the most satisfactory.  I say, just wring out my jacket skirts,
promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding
reefed, and a storm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went
reelingly hurled to the deck by its spasmodic motions, even though preventer
sight that hardly any one can behold without some sort of unwonted emotion.
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb --one engaged forward and the other
tackles had been attached to it --for they were slack -- because some play to
tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water, d'ye see.  Same with
the affairs of the deck, --Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the
the elements.  The loaded muskets in the rack were shiningly revealed, as
the needles in the compasses, at intervals, go round and round.  It was thus
the tiller was indispensable.  In a severe gale like this, while the ship is
the wind seemed coming round astern; aye!  the foul breeze became fair!
they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.  Starbuck was an honest,
this way and that --was burning fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the
through the water with some precision again; and the course --for the present,
thunder?  Um, um, um.  We don't want thunder; we want rum; give us a glass
to the helmsman.  For during the violence of the gale, he had only steered
upper panels.  The isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a certain
will ye?  Thank ye.  They laugh at long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, a



     where his bayonet
     while Stubb and Flask --who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing
.. <p 509 >
.. <p 510 >
Fate.  But as ever before, the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly
Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed
Pequod was as infallibly going West.  But ere the first wild alarm could get
ahead; and when she profoundly settled by the stern, he turned behind, and
arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost seemed to stagger.  Standing behind
astern?  Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then
blinding palpableness must have been the cause.  Thrusting his head half way
clenched fist.  Heading East at this hour in the morning, and the sun
compasses --that's all.  Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, I take
course to be changed accordingly.  The yards were hard up; and once more the
dashed to the deck.  Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun's pilot!  yesterday
either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the original virtue
essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be
extended hand, now took the precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that
eyeing the transpointed compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his
fair one had only been juggling her.  Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret
fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so that the before
fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even were the lowermost
gurgling track, pushed her on like giants' palms outspread.  The strong,
him Starbuck looked, and lo!  the two compasses pointed East, and the
his feelings --likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced.  As for the men, though some
his undeviating wake.  Ha, ha, my ship!  thou mightest well be taken now for
into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse of the compasses; his uplifted
it!  It has happened before.  Mr. Starbuck, last night's thunder turned our
it.  Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir, said the pale
light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place;
lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as to smite down some of the
magnetic energy, as developed in the mariner's needle, is, as all know,
magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife's knitting needle.  But in
mate, gloomily.  Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in
more than one case occurred to ships in violent storms.  The
much marvelled at, that such things should be.  In instances where the
observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very
of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear of
one inserted into the kelson.  Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and
out abroad among the crew, the old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, I have
pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eye the bright sun's rays produced
queens, reigned over everything.  The sea was as a crucible of molten gold,
rays moved on in stacks.  Emblazonings, as of crowned Babylonian kings and
sails; the whole world boomed before the wind.  Muffled in the full morning
saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before
saw the sun's rearward place, and how the same yellow rays were blending with
sea!  But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards
silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time the tetering ship loweringly
sir, said the frightened steersman.  Thou liest!  smiting him with his
spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at times been still more
that bubblingly leaps with light and heat.  Long maintaining an enchanted
the deck in rolling reveries.  But chancing to slip with his ivory heel, he
the helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.  East-sou-east,
the needles were exactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship's
the sea-chariot of the sun.  Ho, ho!  all ye nations before my prow, I bring
the sun to ye!  Yoke on the further billows; hallo!  a tandem, I drive the
their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab's.  For a space the old man walked
thoughts, Starbuck said nothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders;
thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be affected, the same
unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only with a certain magnetism shot into
unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying






     Astern there, sir, astern!  Lo, lo!  And who art thou, boy?  I see not my
     Excellent!  Thou'st hit the world by that.  I know not, sir, but I was born
     Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors
     There he goes now; to him nothing's happened; but to me, the skewer seems
     or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the
     to it.
.. <p 513 >
.. <p 514 >
.. <p 515 >
And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the line.  See
Captain Ahab!  sir, sir!  here's Pip, trying to get on board again.  Peace,
Pip?  come to help; eh, Pip?  Pip?  whom call ye Pip?  Pip jumped from the
above the snow-line.  Oh, ye frozen heavens!  look down here.  Ye did beget
advanced to him.  Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty
advancing.  Hands off from that holiness!  Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?
all inquiring heads at last.  Up with it!  So.  The log was heaved.  The
boy; Ahab's cabin shall be Pip's home henceforth, while Ahab lives.  Thou
felt so kind a thing as this, perhaps he had ne'er been lost!  This seems to
fisherman.  It drags hard; I guess he's holding on.  Jerk him, Tahiti!  Jerk
grey hairs of mine 'tis not worth while disputing, 'specially with a
have spoiled it. 'Twill hold, old gentleman.  Long heat and wet, have they
heart-strings.  Come, let's down.  What's this?  here's velvet shark-skin,
him off; we haul in no cowards here.  Ho!  there's his arm just breaking
intently gazing at Ahab's hand, and feeling it.  Ah, now, had poor Pip but
lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and dragging slow.  Ha,
log-line.  But Ahab can mend all.  Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up, Manxman.
loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long dragging line astern, and
loosening out of the middle of the world.  Haul in, haul in, Tahitian!  These
lowered by the rolling billows, the towing resistance of the log caused the
man from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man;
me, sir, as a man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by.  Oh, sir, let
of clay reward for Pip; five feet high-- looks cowardly --quickest known by
of line revolved, so stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab
old Manxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to
old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together; the black one with the
old reelman to stagger strangely.  Hold hard!  Snap!  the overstrained line
professor in Queen Nature's granite-founded College; but methinks he's too
quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad sea parts the
quarter-deck!  The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser, muttered Ahab,
reflection in the vacant pupils of thy eyes.  Oh God!  that man should be a
sagged down in one long festoon; the tugging log was gone.  I crush the
sir; ship's-crier; ding, dong, ding!  Pip!  Pip!  Pip!  One hundred pounds
speak.  Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet
spoiled thee?  Thou seem'st to hold.  Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not
subservient.  Where wert thou born?  In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.
superior, who'll ne'er confess.  What's that?  There now's a patched
that!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip the coward?  There can be no hearts
then, instantly, the reel began to whirl.  In turn, jerkingly raised and
there.  In the Isle of Man, hey?  Well, the other way, it's good.  Here's a
thing for immortal souls to sieve through!  Who art thou, boy?  Bell-boy,
this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative libertines.  Here,
thou crazy loon, cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.  Away from the
thou it.  I hold the spool, sir.  But just as my captain says.  With these
touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my
water.  A hatchet!  a hatchet!  cut it off -- we haul in no cowards here.
whale-boat.  pip's missing.  let's see now if ye haven't fished him up here,
which is sucked in --by what?  Up with the reel!  The dead, blind wall butts
white, for I will not let this go.


     The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between
     woman of sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once.  And
.. < chapter cxxvii 2  THE DECK >
.. <p 518 >
.. <p 519 >
Cruppered with a coffin!  Sailing about with a grave-yard tray!  But never
I kept my job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their
I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?  moving his hand as with a
Starbuck, after a melancholy pause.  Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me
Stubb.  It will make a good enough one, said Flask, the carpenter here can
Turk's-headed life-lines, each three feet long hanging all round to the
a life-buoy of it.  It's like turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on
all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin?  And now I'm ordered to make
arrange it easily.  Bring it up; there's nothing else for it, said
at the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at
bosom of his frock. --Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip
but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he wont put his head into it.  Are
but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in the feverish
but snow-caps.  Let me see.  Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over
coffin!  cried Starbuck, starting.  Rather queer, that, I should say, said
coffin, and no more. --Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.  He goes
coffin.  Then, if the hull go down, there'll be thirty lively fellows all
coffins and hearses.  We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit;
confounded cobbling, and then we stash it if we can.  hem!  i'll do the job,
eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage, all hands were
fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often beneath the sun!  Come
foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the fulfilment of an evil already
hammer, calking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!  Let's to it.
impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end,
inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin.  A life-buoy of a
it at all; it's undignified; it's not my place.  Let tinkers' brats do
jobs.  Lord!  what an affection all old women have for tinkers.  I know an old
like this.  i make a leg for captain ahab, and he wears it like a gentleman;
lonely old heads to run off with me.  But heigh-ho!  there are no caps at sea
lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see to it;
mind.  We workers in woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as
not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too
now, tenderly.  I'll have me --let's see --how many in the ship's company, all
off in a huff.  The whole he can endure; at the parts he baulks.  Now I don't
over the ship's stern.  Were ever such things done before with a coffin?  Some
pitch-pot.  Away!  What possesses thee to this?  Make a life-buoy of the
presaged.  They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks
ship's stern unprovided with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and
so -- the coffin, I mean.  Dost thou hear me?  Rig it.  And shall I nail down
string of twisted oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the
superstitious old carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere they
that's the reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when
the beginning at the end.  It's the old woman's tricks to be giving cobbling
the conclusion; not a cobbler's job, that's at an end in the middle, and at
the lid, sir?  moving his hand as with a hammer.  aye.  And shall I caulk
the other side now.  I don't like this cobbling sort of business --I don't like
the same with pitch; batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring
the seams, sir?  moving his hand as with a caulking-iron.  Aye.  And shall
the vice-bench and the open hatchway; the Carpenter calking its seams; the
they had heard the night before.  But again the old Manxman said nay.  The
this event, at least as a portent; for they regarded it, not as a
thought of that at the time.  Indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved at
tinkerings; we are their betters.  I like to take in hand none but clean,
told?  But I've forgotten.  Any way, I'll have me thirty separate,
virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins
whatever that might prove to be; therefore, they were going to leave the
would do the job.  But I'm made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don't budge.



     We must save that boy.  He's drowned with the rest on 'em, last night, said
     and not finding anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her
     oh, it's his son he's lost!  I take back the coat and watch --what says Ahab?
--if there be no other way --for eight-and-forty hours only --only that --you
.. <p 522 >
.. <p 523 >
God's sake --I beg, I conjure --here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab,
Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water, not very far to
Pequod's main-chains, and he sprang to the deck.  Immediately he was
Pequod.  He desired that ship to unite with his own in the search; by sailing
Rachel's the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of
The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came on; and forced
a double horizon, as it were.  I will wager something now, whispered Stubb
a shoal of whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship;
advancing.  How was it?  It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the
and while they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump and head of
boat --the swiftest keeled of all --seemed to have succeeded in fastening --at
boats; and though she had thus continued doing till day light; yet not the
bubbling white water; and after that nothing more; whence it was concluded
burst, and all life fled from the smitten hull.  Bad news; she brings bad
coat; mayhap, his watch --he's so cursed anxious to get it back.  Who ever
day previous, while three of the stranger's boats were engaged with
descending her side.  A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the
exchanged.  Where was he? --not killed! --not killed!  cried Ahab, closely
heard of two pious whale-ships cruising after
heard.  Hast seen the White Whale?  Aye, yesterday.  Have ye seen a
instantly lowered in chase.  After a keen sail before the wind, this fourth
last safe aboard, she crowded all sail --stunsail on stunsail --after the
least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen.  The story told, the
least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything about it.  In
leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat --a reserved one --had been
let me charter your ship --I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it
missing boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every
mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he could hopefully hail, Ahab's voice was
must, oh, you must, and you shall do this thing.  His son!  cried Stubb,
necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for the
news, muttered the old Manxman.  But ere her commander, who, with trumpet to
often happens.  There was some apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet.
one in the precisely opposite direction --the ship had not only been
one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season?  See, Flask, only
other man aloft on the look-out.  But though when she had thus sailed a
over the sea some four or five miles apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping
recognized by ahab for a nantucketer he knew.  But no formal salutation was
see how pale he looks --pale in the very buttons of his eyes --look --it wasn't
seen; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her;
spirits.  Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the
stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object in boarding the
sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last
that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers, as
the Captain's sons among the number of the missing boat's crew; but among the
the coat --it must have been the-- My boy, my own boy is among them.  For
the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift gleam of
the old Manx sailor standing behind them; I heard; all of ye heard their
the stranger captain himself, having stopped his vessel's way, was seen
time, to increase her distance from it.  But the rest of her crew being at
to Flask, that some one in that missing boat wore off that Captain's best
to her, the boastful sails all fell together as blank bladders that are
to pick up her three far to windward boats --ere going in quest of the fourth
unexpected question; and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when
whale-boat adrift?  Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this
who thus far had but icily received his petition.  For eight-and-forty hours




     Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward.) Here he this instant stood;
     And now that at the proper time and place,
     But here I'll stay, though this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge
     Weep so, and I will murder thee!  have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
.. < chapter cxxx 26  THE HAT >
.. <p 526 >
.. <p 526 >
.. <p 527 >
Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and
Fedallah now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him; that the men looked
He must be up here; let's try the door.  What?  neither lock, nor bolt, nor
I stand in his air, --but I'm alone.  Now were even poor Pip here I could
Listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still know
Parsee's glance awed his; or somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more strove to check one.
above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain
affected it.  Such an added, gliding strangeness began to invest the thin
after so long and wide a preliminary cruise, Ahab, --all other whaling waters
as the circumference to its centre.  So: God for ever bless thee; and if it
bar; and yet there's no opening it.  It must be the spell; he told me to
come to that, -- God for ever save thee, let what will befall.
confidential hours; when he thought no glance but one was on him; then you
dubious at him; half uncertain, as it seemed, whether indeed he were a
endure it, but he's missing.  Pip!  Pip!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip?
epaulets all come crowding!  Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill
eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see.  As the
gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew.  It domineered
go with ye.  If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab's purpose keels up
had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very day
her three masts before me.  Here, our old sailors say, in their black
in him.  I tell thee no; it cannot be.  Oh good master, master, master!
indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether sinning or
ivory --Oh, master, master!  I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me.
let's drink shame upon all cowards!  I name no names.  Shame upon them!  Put
living skin.  But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him.  Sir, I must
longitude where his tormenting wound
machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious that the old
man's despot eye was on them.  But did you deeply scan him in his more secret
meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac
negro lad, five feet high,  hang-dog look, and cowardly!  Jumped from a
of captains and lieutenants.  Ha!  what's this?  epaulets!  epaulets!  the
one foot upon the table.  Shame upon all cowards. --Hist!  above there, I hear
powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar of ahab's iron soul.  like
preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick; --and now that all his successive
seat me, against the transom, in the ship's full middle, all her keel and
securely there; now, that he found himself hard by the very latitude and
seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows
sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something in the old man's
stay here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine.  Here, then, I'll
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab's purpose now fixedly
swept --seemed to have chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more
that I am there.  And now I quit thee.  Thy hand! --Met!  True art thou, lad,
this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
through; and oysters come to join me.
to hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.  In
unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months' night
up, monsieurs!  What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy's host to white men
whale-boat once; --seen him?  No!  Well then, fill up again, captains, and
with gold lace upon their coats! --Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip? --a little
would have seen that even as Ahab's eyes so awed the crew's, the inscrutable



     But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good.  Ahab's
     The intense Pequod
     freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise distrusted person's
--it was strange, that this was the very man he should select for his watchman;
.. < chapter cxxxi 10  THE PEQUOD MEETS THE DELIGHT >
.. <p 530 >
.. <p 531 >
.. <p 531 >
Whale?  Look!  replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail; and
a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the
advance of the prow: and at last disappeared; while from the point of that
an eagle flew thrice round Tarquin's head, removing his cap to replace it,
and thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome.
and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few minutes cast down
be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose
called shears, which, in some whaling-ships, cross the quarter-deck at the
cannot always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at the deck;
crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea.  So Ahab's proceedings
descried.  As she drew nigh, all eyes were fixed upon her broad beams,
disabled boats.  Upon the stranger's shears were beheld the shattered, white
disappearance, a minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast
eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight.  Your
from the fastenings, it would be but a natural fatality, if, unprovided with
gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles, --ahead, astern, this side, and
half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse.  Hast seen the White
hands.  Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten
hat was never restored; the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in
hat, your hat, sir!  suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who being posted at
head.  But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed
height into the sea.
height of eight or nine feet; serving to carry the spare, unrigged, or
him with anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision --one of
his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing them.  But already the sable
in strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it.  Because in
in this matter were not unusual; the only strange thing about them seemed to
in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the rigging,
incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these
latitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a
lightly swung; and another ship, most miserably misnamed the Delight, was
maze of untrackably swift circlings.  Then it darted a thousand feet straight
minutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly
much, it being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least heedful
not to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked it
not yet forged that will ever do that, answered the other, sadly glancing
perch, Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards
ribs, and some few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; but
sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; the life-buoy-coffin still
scream, the black hawk darted away with his prize.
spot, and sustained there by
stood near it.  And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast, Ahab
such a wilderness of running rigging, whose various different relations aloft
that, --within the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.  When
the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though somewhat lower than
the rope; under these circumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given
those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat;
up into the air; then spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his
upon a rounded hammock on the deck, whose gathered sides some noiseless
which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is hoisted up to that
wing was before the old man's eyes; the long hooked bill at his head: with a
with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck.  Hast killed him?  The harpoon is
you now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through the peeled,




     Away with me!  let us fly these deadly waters!  let us home!  Wife and child,
     three ashore.  When I think of this life I have led; the desolation of
     to Moby Dick.  That hazard shall not be thine.  No, no!  not with the far
     whole oceans away, from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty, and
--and how for forty years I have fed upon dry salted fare -- fit emblem of the
--oh, weariness!  heaviness!  Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command! --when
.. <p 535 >
Ahab been!  Why this strife of the chase?  why weary,
Ahab forsaken the peaceful land, for forty years to make war on the horrors
God!  God! --crack my heart!-- stave my brain! --mockery!  mockery!  bitter,
Here, brush this old hair aside; it blinds me, that I seem to weep.  Locks
How cheerily, how hilariously, O my Captain, would we bowl on our way to
I think of all this; only half-suspected, not so keenly known to me before
I were Adam, staggering beneath the piled centuries since Paradise.  God!
ago! --ago!  Forty years of continual whaling!  forty years of privation, and
and feel thus intolerably old?  Close!  stand close to me, Starbuck; let me
and palsy the arm at the oar, and the iron, and the lance?  how the richer or
away home I see in that eye!  Oh, my Captain!  my Captain!  noble soul!
better is Ahab now?  Behold.  Oh, Starbuck!  is it not hard, that with this
biting mockery of grey hairs, have I lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem
dance him again.  Tis my Mary, my Mary herself!  She promised that my boy,
drop.  Starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over the
dry nourishment of my soul --when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to
even as this, in nantucket.  they have, they have.  I have seen them --some
every morning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of
frenzy, the boiling blood and the smoking brow, with which, for a thousand
grand old heart, after all!  why should any one give chase to that hated fish!
heart to save and to bless.  From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear
him, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near to him, and stood there.  Ahab
his daily hand, and broken the world's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts --away,
his father's sail!  Yes, yes!  no more!  it is done!  we head for Nantucket!
into the sea; nor did all the pacific contain such wealth as that one wee
is the magic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye.  No, no;
look into a human eye; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better
lowerings old Ahab has furiously, foamingly chased his prey --more a demon
mild looking sky.  On such a day --very much such a sweetness as this --I
of cannibal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep, but will yet come back to
of the deep!  Aye and yes, Starbuck, out of those forty years I have not spent
paternal old age!  Away!  let us away! --this instant let me alter the course!
peril, and storm-time!  forty years on the pitiless sea!  for forty years has
pillow --wife?  wife? --rather a widow with her husband alive!  Aye, I widowed
sailed for Cape Horn the next day, leaving but one dent in my marriage
see old Nantucket again!  I think, sir, they have some such mild blue days,
side; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing
so grey did never grow but from out some ashes!  But do I look very old, so
solitude it has been; the masoned, walled-town of a Captain's exclusiveness,
stay on board, on board! --lower not when I do; when branded Ahab gives chase
struck my first whale --a boy-harpooneer of eighteen!  Forty-- forty--forty years
summer days in the morning.  About this time --yes, it is his noon nap now --
than a man! --aye, aye!  what a forty years' fool --fool --old fool, has old
than to gaze upon God.  By the green land; by the bright hearth-stone!  this
that poor girl when I married her, Starbuck; and then, the madness, the
that stole out of the centre of the serenity around.  Careful not to touch
the boy vivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me,
too, are Starbuck's --wife and child of his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellow
turned.  Starbuck!  Sir.  Oh, Starbuck!  it is a mild, mild wind, and a
very, very old, Starbuck?  I feel deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as though
weary load I bear, one poor leg should have been snatched from under me?
which admits but small entrance to any sympathy from the green country without
youth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy loving, longing,



     To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they had so long
     horns; his lovely, leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth
     right away from us; cannot have seen the ship yet.  Be dumb, man!  Stand
.. <p 539 >
.. <p 540 >
Fate reserved the doubloon for me.  I only; none of ye could have raised the
Indian's head was almost on a level with Ahab's heel.  From this height the
Jove, not that great majesty Supreme!  did surpass the glorified White Whale
Lower me, Mr. Starbuck; lower, lower, --quick, quicker!  and he slid through
Tashtego.  Not the same instant; not the same --no, the doubloon is mine,
There again! --there again!  he cried, in long-drawn, lingering, methodic
White Whale first.  There she blows!  there she blows! --there she blows!
ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans.  And did none of ye see
all the boat-sails set --all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness,
almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did, and I cried out, said
among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture, Moby
and behind, the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving valley
as he so divinely swam.  On each soft side --coincident with the parted swell,
assail it; but had fatally
at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering, and to and fro
before.  And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea,
bewitching fleetness, rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete; not
boats.  Mr. Starbuck, remember, stay on board, and keep the ship.  Helm
broad, milky forehead, a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade;
by the braces!  Hard down the helm! --brace up!  Shiver her! --shiver her!  So;
found that quietude but the vesture of tornadoes.  Yet calm, enticing calm,
going to sound!  In stunsails!  Down top-gallant-sails!  Stand by three
his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silent spout into the air.
involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting head beyond.  Before it, far out
it before?  cried Ahab, hailing the perched men all around him.  I saw him
lit up Fedallah's sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.  Like
matter how many in that same way thou may'st have bejuggled and destroyed
mighty mildness of repose in swiftness, invested the gliding whale.  Not the
no; only black water!  All ready the boats there?  Stand by, stand by!
noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea; but only
of his steady wake; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his
oh, whale!  thou glidest on, to all who for the first time eye thee, no
on the soft Turkish-rugged waters, went the glistening white shadow from his
pole, the long tail feathers streaming like pennons.  A gentle joyousness --a
seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his entire dazzling hump was distinctly
serenely it spread.  At length the breathless hunter came so nigh his
set in a revolving ring of finest, fleecy, greenish foam.  He saw the vast,
shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale's back; and
shooting to leeward; and Ahab heading the onset.  A pale, death-glimmer
side.  But these were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay fowl
skimming like a canopy over the fish, silently perched and rocked on this
slowly they neared the foe.  As they neared him, the ocean grew still more
smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves; seemed a noon-meadow, so
softly feathering the sea, alternate with their fitful flight; and like to
some flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy, the tall but
standing just beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant mast, so that the
that but once leaving him, then flowed so wide away --on each bright side,
the air to the deck.  He is heading straight to leeward, sir, cried Stubb,
the whale shed off enticings.  No wonder there had been some among the hunters
there!  Luff, luff a point!  So; steady, man, steady!  There go flukes!  No,
tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale's visible jets.  He's
visible, sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing, and continually
well that!  Boats, boats!  Soon all the boats but Starbuck's were dropped;
whale was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the sea revealing
white bull Jupiter swimming away with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful
who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, had ventured to


     The harpoon, said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning on one
     like a tossed bubble which the least chance shock might burst.  From the
.. <p 543 >
.. <p 544 >
Maccabees.  Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in the foam of the whale's insolent
Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship's mast
Stubb, showing it.  Lay it before me; --any missing men?  One, two, three,
and tilting over sideways as it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on
aspect, and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made, that
assault.  The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him, as the blood
bended arm -- is it safe?  Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it, said
boat's fragmentary
body; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose --some twenty or more feet
crest, he shouted, -- Sail on the whale! --Drive him off!  The Pequod's
dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossing their shivered spray still
desolate sounds from out ravines.  But this intensity of his physical
down in the billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled
even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that; helpless Ahab's head was seen,
flat-faced upon the sea.  Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now
flew to the rescue.  Dragged into Stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes,
foot of herds of elephants.  Far inland, nameless wails came from him, as
four, five; --there were five oars, sir, and here are five men.  That's
going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!  Hands off from me!  The eternal
good. --Help me, man; I wish to stand.  So, so, I see him!  there!  there!
great hearts sometimes condense to one deep pang, the sum total of those
he seemed horizontally swooping upon them.  And though the other boats,
heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon the scene; and was
hearts, though summary in each one suffering; still, if the gods decree it,
higher into the air.  So, in a gale, the but half-baffled Channel billows only
hold for the time; at that moment his hand had made one final effort to push
hope to escape.  With straining eyes, then, they remained on the outer edge
in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly made up of
instantaneous intensities; for even in their pointless centres, those noble
jeopardized castaways, Ahab and all; nor in that case could they themselves
lay at a little distance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and
moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick, and whelmed him for the
natures contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls.
now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailed her; -- Sail on the --but that
of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus's elephants in the book of
of the direful zone, whose centre had now become the old man's head.
other drifting end, could not succor him; more than enough was it for them
out of the water --the now rising swells, with all their confluent waves,
parted the white whale from his victim.  As he sullenly swam off, the boats
prostration did but so much the more abbreviate it.  In an instant's compass,
prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle, she effectually
recoil from the base of the Eddystone, triumphantly to overleap its summit
sap runs up in Ahab's bones again!  Set the sail; out oars; the helm!  It
shallow pains kindly diffused through feebler men's whole lives.  And so, such
stern, Fedallah incuriously and mildly eyed him; the clinging crew, at the
strength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body's doom: for a
strike, lest that should be the signal for the instant destruction of the
swiftly round and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his
tail, and too much of a cripple to swim, --though he could still keep afloat,
the boat out of the bite.  But only slipping further into the whale's mouth,
the jaw; spilled him out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell
the white brine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of Ahab's bodily
time, lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb's boat, like one trodden under
time.  But struggling out of it again, and chancing to rise on a towering
to look to themselves.  For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale's
unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into the eddy to
vengeful wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly
with their scud.  But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam



     And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, and slouching
     At day-break, the three
     but this swift motion of the deck creeps up one's legs and tingles at the
(pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary up-and-down poise
.. < chapter cxxxiv 16  THE CHASE--SECOND DAY >
.. <p 542n. >
.. <p 546 >
.. <p 547 >
.. <p 548 >
Leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarly known in its every pace,
This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.  It receives its designation
according to the observed humor of his speed; and say to themselves, so many
acuteness at all successful in the end, the wind and the sea must be the
again, but at some further point; like as this pilot stands by his compass,
allowing a little space for the light to spread.  see nothing, sir.  Turn
among the Nantucket commanders; that from the simple observation of a whale
and takes the precise bearing of the cape at present visible, in order the
are occasions when these Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep,
as well as his probable rate of progression during that period.  And, in these
baby's pulse; and lightly say of it, the up train or the down train will
being chased, and diligently marked, through several hours of daylight,
blows! --right ahead!  was now the mast-head cry.  Aye, aye!  cried Stubb.
cases, somewhat as a pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whose
collateral subtile matters touching the chase of whales.  The ship tore on;
darkness is almost as established to the sagacious mind of the hunter, as the
described.  By this motion the whale must best and most comprehensively view
direction in which he will continue to swim for a time, while out of sight,
experience, and invincible confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses
general trending he well knows, and which he desires shortly to return to
heart.  This
his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervals rousing himself to
hours hence this whale will have gone two hundred miles, will have about
leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a cannon-ball, missent, becomes a
mariner is the skill that assures him he is exactly ninety-three leagues and a
mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.  D'ye see him?  cried Ahab, after
matter --'tis but resting for the rush.  Here be it said, that this
me, spine-wise, on the sea, --for by live-oaks!  my spine's a keel.  Ha, ha!
more certainly to hit aright the remote, unseen headland, eventually to be
night, and through night into day, is a thing by no means unprecedented in
of the whale-lance, in the exercise called pitchpoling, previously
pertinacious pursuit of one particular whale, continued through day into
pilot's coast is to him.  So that to this hunter's wondrous skill, the
plough-share and turns up the level field.  By salt and hemp!  cried Stubb,
proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water, a wake, is to all desired
purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land.  And as the mighty iron
quarter from his port?  Inferable from these statements, are many
reach such or such a spot, at such or such an hour; even so, almost, there
reached this or that degree of latitude or longitude.  But to render this
see how the night wore on.
ship and I are two brave fellows! --Ha!  ha!  Some one take me up, and launch
that, with watches in their hands, men time his rate as doctors that of a
the South sea fishery.  For such is the wonderful skill, prescience of
then, when night obscures the fish, the creature's future wake through the
top-gallant sails! --aye, they should have been kept on her all night.  But no
under certain given circumstances, pretty accurately foretell both the
up all hands and make sail!  he travels faster than I thought for; --the
visited: so does the fisherman, at his compass, with the whale; for after
we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!  There she blows --she blows! --she
whaleman's allies; for of what present avail to the becalmed or windbound
whatever objects may be encircling him.
when last descried, they will,
--corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, loose harpoons and lances, with all
.. <p 551 >
.. <p 552 >
a boat, picked up the floating mariners, tubs, oars and whatever else could
a certain limit, such a course excludes the coming onset from the whale's
a sudden rush among the remaining tangles of the other lines; by so doing,
again --hoping that way to disencumber it of some snarls --when lo! --a sight
against its bottom, and sent it, turning over and over, into the air; till
and then, diving down into the sea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom, in
and was now coming for the three crews.  Ahab's boat was central; and
appalling battle on every side; and heedless of the irons darted at him from
as if to rally for a more tremendous charge.  Seizing that opportunity, Ahab
bit of plank, the least chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail
boat.  Only one thing could be done.  Seizing the boat-knife, he critically
boats, but keep near them.  Lower, all!  As if to strike a quick terror into
bobbed up and down like an empty vial, twitching his legs upwards to escape
cheering his men, he told them he would take the whale head-and-head, --that
churning himself into furious speed, almost in an instant as it were,
descried the whole fight, again came bearing down to the rescue, and dropping
destruction he had made; and with his back to it, he now lay for a moment
entangled the slack of the three lines now fast to him, that they
every boat, seemed only intent on annihilating each separate plank of which
evolutions, the White Whale so crossed and recrossed, and in a thousand ways
first paid out more line: and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it
flukes; dashed them together like two rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach,
forehead through the
foreshortened, and, of themselves, warped the devoted boats towards the
into the sea; and was all fast again.  That instant, the White Whale made
irresistibly dragged the more involved boats of Stubb and Flask towards his
is, pull straight up to his forehead, --a not uncommon thing; for when within
it fell again --gunwale downwards --and Ahab and his men struggled out from
launched him along it, to a little distance from the centre of the
line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture, while aslope little Flask
more savage than the embattled teeth of sharks!  Caught and twisted
ocean, and trailing after him the intertangled lines, continued his leeward
perpendicularly from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broad forehead
planted irons in him; though now for a moment the whale drew aside a little,
points, came flashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab's
pulling into the creamy pool to rescue whom he could; --in that wild
reached within --through --and then, without --the rays of steel; dragged in
round, like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl of punch.  While the
rushing among the boats with open jaws, and a lashing tail, offered
satisfied that his work for that time was done, he pushed his pleated
seemed drawn up towards Heaven by invisible wires, --as, arrow-like, shooting
sidelong vision.  But ere that close limit was gained, and while yet all
simultaneousness of a thousand concreted perils, --Ahab's yet unstricken boat
slowly feeling with his flukes from side to side; and whenever a stray oar,
sundering the rope near the chocks --dropped the intercepted fagot of steel
swiftly drew back, and came sideways smiting the sea.  But soon, as if
the dreaded jaws of sharks; and Stubb was lustily singing out for some one
the line beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman, and then, twice
their bristling barbs and
them, by this time being the first assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned,
those boats were made.  But skilfully manoeuvred, incessantly wheeling like
three boats were plain as the ship's three masts to his eye; the White Whale
times, but by a plank's breadth; while all the time, Ahab's unearthly slogan
to ladle him up; and while the old man's line --now parting -- admitted of his
tore every other cry but his to shreds.  But at last in his untraceable
trained chargers in the field; the boats for a while eluded him; though, at
two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out after the revolving
under it, like seals from a seaside cave.  The first uprising momentum of the
way at a traveller's methodic pace.  As before, the attentive ship having
whale --modifying its direction as he struck the surface --involuntarily
which, for a space, the odorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced round and




     D'ye see him?  cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.  In his
     I'll solve it, though!  When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight
     craft the carpenter made him another leg; while still as on the
     thing --a nobler thing that that.  Would now the wind but had a body; but
.. <p 555 >
.. <p 555 >
.. <p 556 >
Ahab's hawser tows his purpose yet.  Believe ye, men, in the things called
And yesterday I talked the same to Starbuck there, concerning my broken
But ere I break, ye'll hear me crack; and till ye hear that, know that
THE CHASE--THIRD DAY The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and
Then as the men went forward, he muttered on: -- The things called omens!
Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts
a glass in which the contents turned to ice, and shiver it.  And still this
a new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the angels, and this
all the things that most exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things
and now comes blowing hither as innocent as
at it, and you but run through it.  Ha!  a coward wind that strikes stark
boat.  Oh!  how valiantly I seek to drive out of others' hearts what's
brave?  As fearless fire, cried Stubb.  And as mechanical, muttered Ahab.
clinched so fast in mine! --The Parsee --the Parsee! -- gone, gone?  and he
conquered it?  In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow.  Run tilting
earthy clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava.  How the wild winds blow
fleeces.  Out upon it! --it's tainted.  Were I the wind, I'd blow no more on
for the earliest sun.
fresh weapons for the morrow.  Meantime, of the broken keel of Ahab's wrecked
hair is growing now; this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no,
he'll rise once more, --but only to spout his last!  D'ye feel brave men,
heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its dial; sat due eastward
in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and sharpening their
infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.  Helm there;
it's like that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between the
it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the tossed
lance; propped up on a lonely foot. 'Tis Ahab --his body's part; but Ahab's
morning the first of its throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn
mortal man!  to think's audacity.  God only has that right and privilege.
naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.  Even Ahab is a braver
nearly as on the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of
never thinks; he only feels, feels, feels; that's tingling enough for
night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his scuttle; his hid,
of the daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.
of the whole line of judges: --like a hawk's beak it pecks my brain.  I'll,
omens?  Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!  For ere they drown, drowning things
once more the solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds
prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, and ventilated them,
ship they cling to.  A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this through
soul's a centipede, that moves upon a hundred legs.  I feel strained, half
steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.  What a lovely day again; were it
stranded, as ropes that tow dismasted frigates in a gale; and I may look so.
such a wicked, miserable world.  I'd crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink
that? --There's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed by the ghosts
the grindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by lanterns
there.  And yet, 'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind!  who ever
thought my brain was very calm --frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like
throb, and our poor brains beat too much for that.  And yet, I've sometimes
to leeward.  So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed
upon that world.  Here's food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab
was to go before: --but still was to be seen again ere I could perish --How's
will twice rise to the surface; then rise again, to sink for evermore.  So
with Moby Dick --two days he's floated --to-morrow will be the third.  Aye, men,

     the second the noon, and the third the evening and the end of that thing --be
--beats it yet? --Stir thyself, Starbuck! --stave it off-- move, move!  speak
--lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by them, open-mouthed
.. <p 559 >
.. <p 560 >
Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all the
Ha!  ha!  Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles;
My legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day.  Feel thy heart,
Starbuck.  I am old; --shake hands with me, man.  Their hands met; their eyes
Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when
again! --drive off that hawk!  see!  he pecks --he tears the vane --pointing to
agony of the persuasion then!  Lower away! --cried Ahab, tossing the mate's
aloud! --Mast-head there!  See ye my boy's hand on the hill? --Crazed; --aloft
apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures hover over
arm from him.  Stand by the crew!  In an instant the boat was pulling round
blue air to the deck.  In due time the boats were lowered, but as standing in
boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads --a downward
cabin-window there; O master, my master, come back!  But Ahab heard
close under the stern.  The sharks!  the sharks!  cried a voice from the low
fastened; Starbuck's tears the glue.  Oh, my captain, my captain! --noble
first descried; and whether it was that Ahab's crew were all such
from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing, Starbuck!  Truth, sir:
full of the flood; --and I feel now like a billow that's all one crested comb,
hammered against the opposing bow.  Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves!
happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks at times
heart --go not --go not! -- see, it's a brave man that weeps; how great the
held on his way a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew
him at the next rising, he
his eyes the receding boat -- canst thou yet ring boldly to that sight?
his shallop's stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he
hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time they dipped
in the water; and in this
leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant, --fixed at the top of a shudder!
lid; and no coffin and no hearse can be mine: --and hemp only can kill me!
maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered and
me; boy!  I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue.  Strangest problems
nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the boat leaped on.
numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the
of life seem clearing; but clouds sweep between --Is my journey's end coming?
of the sharks --a matter sometimes well known to affect them, --however it was,
past is somehow grown dim.  Mary, girl!  thou fadest in pale glories behind
pause.  Starbuck!  Sir?  For the third time my soul's ship starts upon
pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but intending to be near
saddest truth.  Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the
sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had been
subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled with
swiftly rising to the surface.  A low rumbling sound was heard; a
that end what it may.  Oh!  my God!  what is this that shoots through me, and
the banners of marching regiments in the east.  But these were the first
the old man now?  sees't thou that sight, oh Ahab! -- shudder, shudder!  The
the red flag flying at the main-truck -- Ha!  he soars away with it! -- Where's
then quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice,
there! --keep thy keenest eye upon the boats: --mark well the whale! --Ho!
they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others.  Heart of
this voyage, Starbuck.  Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.  Some ships sail
tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses
to the chase; and this the critical third day? --For when three days flow
to their uttermost heads, drive them in!  ye but strike a thing without a
together in one continuous intense pursuit; be sure the first is the morning,
trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot lengthwise, but
waved to the mate, --who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck --and bade him
way accompanied the boat with their bites.  It is a thing not uncommonly
wrought steel!  murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and following with


     Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work.  Steady!  helmsman, steady.  Nay, nay!  Up
     helm!  take the helm; let me pass, --and so saying, two of the oarsmen
--'tis whole again; oars!  oars!  Burst in upon him!  Hearing the tremendous
.. <p 563 >
.. <p 564 >
As it was, three of the oarsmen --who foreknew not the precise instant of the
But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line, and
again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and
and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades became jagged and
and tug, it snapped in the empty air!  What breaks in me?  Some sinew cracks!
before me that I may yet grope my way.  Is't night?  The whale!  The ship!
bethinking it --it may be --a larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down
better rest, the shark's jaw than the yielding water.  But at every bite,
boat up to the mark; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain
but so fell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again, and
craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with the White Whale's
cried the cringing oarsmen.  Oars!  oars Slope downwards to thy depths, O
crunched, and left small splinters in the sea, at almost every dip.  Heed
curse into the hated whale.  As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as
dart, and were therefore unprepared for its effects -- these were flung out;
flag, half-wrapping him as with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out
flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance --as the whale sometimes
forehead at bay; but in that evolution, catching sight of the nearing black
from him, as his own forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb,
from the whale's spout, curled round his great, Monadnock hump; he was even
helm again!  He turns to meet us!  Oh, his unappeasable brow drives on towards
helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.  At length as the
high-lifted to the poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer
his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats, and tow the
hull of the ship; seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions;
if sucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled
instant, Tashtego's mast-head hammer remained suspended in his hand; and the
instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering sea.
into the sea.
jaw!  Is this the end of all my bursting prayers?  all my life-long fidelities?
just as soon as he.  The whale, the whale!  Up helm, up helm!  Oh, all ye
level with the waves; its half-wading, splashing crew, trying hard to stop
must, in a woman's fainting fit.  Up helm, I say --ye fools, the jaw!  the
on the whale or on ahab? --But pull on!  Aye, all alive, now --we near him.  The
one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart.  My God, stand by me now!
pull on! --But who can tell --he muttered -- whether these sharks swim to feast
red
rising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard
rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled round to present his blank
save my ship?  But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the
sea, that ere it be for ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time
sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!  They will last long enough!
sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks burst
staggered; his hand smote his forehead.  I grow blind; hands!  stretch out
standing upon the bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated part of
sweet powers of air, now hug me close!  Let not Starbuck die, if die he
swimming.  Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
the gap and bale out the pouring water.  Meantime, for that one beholding
the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have been tossed
them not!  those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.  Pull on! 'tis the
through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly
thus close to him; when, with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise
upon his mark; I see: the ship!  the ship!  Dash on, my men!  Will ye not
upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.  Ahab
will --and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off







     GREAT FORCE, THE COFFIN LIFE-BUOY SHOT LENGTHWISE FROM THE SEA, FELL OVER,
     OF THAT SLOWLY WHEELING CIRCLE, LIKE ANOTHER +IXION +I DID REVOLVE. +TILL, G
     THE ENSUING SCENE, AND IN FULL SIGHT OF IT, WHEN THE HALF-SPENT SUCTION OF T
     flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar.  A sky-hawk that tauntingly
     simultaneously feeling that etherial thrill, the submerged savage beneath,
$README.;1               19
+WHY THEN HERE DOES ANY ONE STEP FORTH? --+BECAUSE ONE DID SURVIVE THE WRECK. +
, THEN, AND EVER CONTRACTING TOWARDS THE BUTTON-LIKE BLACK BUBBLE AT THE AXIS
.. < epilogue / This text of Melville's Moby-Dick is based on the Hendricks
2  +AND +I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE. +JOB. +THE DRAMA'S DONE.
AINING THAT VITAL CENTRE, THE BLACK BUBBLE UPWARD BURST; AND NOW, LIBERATED
AND FLOATED BY MY SIDE. +BUOYED UP BY THAT COFFIN, FOR ALMOST ONE WHOLE DAY
AND NIGHT, +I FLOATED ON A SOFT AND DIRGE-LIKE MAIN. +THE UNHARMING SHARKS,
BY REASON OF ITS CUNNING SPRING, AND OWING TO ITS GREAT BUOYANCY, RISING WITH
D WITH SHEATHED BEAKS. +ON THE SECOND DAY, A SAIL DREW NEAR, NEARER, AND PIC
Directory DISK$MATIPO:[CCC.BILL.LIB.MOBY]
E VACANT POST; THE SAME, WHO, WHEN ON THE LAST DAY THE THREE MEN WERE TOSSED F
FRED.COM;1                1
HE SUNK SHIP REACHED ME, +I WAS THEN, BUT SLOWLY, DRAWN TOWARDS THE CLOSING VO
House / edition.  It was prepared by Professor Eugene F. Irey AT THE +UNIVERSIT
IES OF THIS DATA MUST INCLUDE THIS NOTICE / AND ANY PUBLICATIONS RESULTING FRO
IT SO CHANCED, THAT AFTER THE +PARSEE'S DISAPPEARANCE, +I WAS HE WHOM THE +FA
KED ME UP AT LAST. +IT WAS THE DEVIOUS-CRUISING +RACHEL, THAT IN HER RETRACIN
M ANALYSIS OF THIS DATA MUST INCLUDE / REFERENCE TO +PROFESSOR +IREY'S WORK.
MOBY.01;1                25
MOBY.02;1                16
MOBY.03;1                64
MOBY.04;1                19
MOBY.05;1                 9
MOBY.06;1                10
MOBY.07;1                11
MOBY.08;1                11
MOBY.09;1                40
MOBY.0;1                  5
ROM OUT THE ROCKING BOAT, WAS DROPPED ASTERN. +SO, FLOATING ON THE MARGIN OF
RTEX. +WHEN +I REACHED IT, IT HAD SUBSIDED TO A CREAMY POOL. +ROUND AND ROUND
TES ORDAINED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF +AHAB'S BOWSMAN, WHEN THAT BOWSMAN ASSUMED TH
THEY GLIDED BY AS IF WITH PADLOCKS ON THEIR MOUTHS; THE SAVAGE SEA-HAWKS SAILE
Y / OF +COLORADO, +BOULDER, +COLORADO 80309, +U.+S.+A. / +ANY SUBSEQUENT COP
destroying billows they almost touched; --at that instant, a red arm and a
had followed the main-truck downwards from its natural home among the stars,
hammer hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act of nailing the
in his death-gasp, kept his hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven,
inanimate, all round and round in one vortex, carried the smallest chip of
inches of the erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of
it rolled five thousand years ago.
of heaven along with her, and helmeted herself with it.  Now small fowls flew
pecking at the flag, and incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced
screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen white surf beat against its
steep sides; then all collapsed, and the great shroud of the sea rolled on as
the Pequod out of sight.  But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured
the flag, which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the
themselves over the sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few
to intercept its broad fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; and
which, like Satan, would not sink to hell till she had dragged a living part
whole captive form folded in the flag of Ahab, went down with his ship,
with archangelic shrieks, and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his

MOBY.39;1                 3
MOBY.40;1                18
MOBY.41;1                44
MOBY.42;1                42
MOBY.43;1                 4
MOBY.44;1                24
MOBY.45;1                40
MOBY.46;1                12
MOBY.47;1                11
MOBY.48;1                45
MOBY.49;1                10
MOBY.50;1                12
MOBY.51;1                17
MOBY.52;1                 9
MOBY.53;1                19
MOBY.54;1                89
MOBY.55;1                22
MOBY.56;1                16
MOBY.57;1                12
MOBY.58;1                12
MOBY.59;1                11
MOBY.60;1                17
MOBY.61;1                23
MOBY.62;1                 7
MOBY.63;1                 6
MOBY.64;1                33
MOBY.65;1                11
MOBY.66;1                 8
MOBY.67;1                 9
MOBY.68;1                14
MOBY.69;1                 6
MOBY.70;1                11
MOBY.71;1                27
MOBY.73;1                23
MOBY.74;1                19
MOBY.75;1                14
MOBY.76;1                11
MOBY.77;1                 8
MOBY.78;1                19
MOBY.79;1                11
MOBY.80;1                11
MOBY.81;1                49
MOBY.82;1                13
MOBY.83;1                10
MOBY.84;1                10
MOBY.85;1                23
MOBY.86;1                21
MOBY.87;1                57
MOBY.88;1                15
MOBY.89;1                17
MOBY.90;1                12
MOBY.91;1                28
MOBY.92;1                11
MOBY.93;1                19
MOBY.94;1                15
MOBY.95;1                 6
MOBY.96;1                21
MOBY.97;1                 3
MOBY.98;1                12
MOBY.99;1                27
MOBY.LIS;1                0
Total of 137 files, 2442 blocks.
