





     Call me Ishmael.  Some years ago--never mind how
     Right and left, the streets take you waterward.  Its extreme down-town is
     This is my substitute for pistol and ball.  With a philosophical flourish
.. < chapter I 2  LOOMINGS >
Any subsequent copies of this data must include this notice  
Cato throws himself upon his sword; I quietly take to the ship.  There is
Etymology  (Supplied by a late consumptive usher to a grammar school.)
Extracts (supplied by a sub-sub-librarian.)
For by how much the more pains ye take to please the world,
He loved to dust his old grammars; it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.
He was ever  dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queer handkerchief,
It was prepared by Professor Eugene F. Irey at the University of Colorado.
It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grubworm of a poor 
Preliminary Matter.  
So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commentator I am.
The pale Ushei{rthreadbare} in coat, heart, body, and brain; I see him now.
Therefore you must not, in every case at least, take the higgledy-piggledy
This text of Melville's Moby-Dick is based on the Hendricks House edition.
Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this world will 
Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye!  But
and any publications resulting from analysis of this data must
and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full eyes and empty 
and making refugees of long-pampered  Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against
as affording a glancing bird's eye view of what has been promiscuously said,
as the poets here appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining,
breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land.  Look at the
but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too;
by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless!
by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it with her surf.
cetology.  Far from it.  As touching the ancient authors generally, as well 
degree, some time or other, cherish very nearly the same feelings towards the
devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have gone through the long Vaticans and 
ever warm; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong;
from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking
glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness i{give} it up, sub-subs!
gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your  hearts; for
he could anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane.
include reference to Professor Irey's work.
including our own.
long precisely --having little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular
mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all the known nations of the world.
mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find
myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the
nothing surprising in this.  If they but knew it, almost all men in their
ocean with me.  There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round
people's hats off--then, I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can.
rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an
regulating the circulation.  Whenever I find myself growing grim about the
street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random allusions to whales 
strike unsplinterable
the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled by
thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many nations and generations,
to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the
upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me
watery part of the world.  It is a way I have of driving off the spleen, and
whale statements, however authentic, in these extracts, for veritable gospel
your coming.  Here ye strike but splintered hearts together i{there}, ye shall
your friends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens,
.. <p 4 >
.. <p 5 >
Affghanistan.  Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage
Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes.  And more than all, if just
Testament?  Do you think the archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me,
United States.  Whaling Voyage by one Ishmael.  Bloody Battle in
a sailor, because of the wholesome exercise and pure air of the forecastle
act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two
and bear it.  But even this wears off in time.  What of it, if some old hunks
and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin
because I promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular
can better answer than any one else.  And, doubtless, my going on this whaling
cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!  Finally, I always go to sea as
considering that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly
content.  Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of
country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys stand in awe of you.  The
deck.  For as in this world, head winds are far more prevalent than winds
extensive performances.  I take it that this part of the bill must have run
from astern (that is, if you never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for
hand from the sailors on the forecastle.  He thinks he breathes it first; but
have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that everybody else
ibis and roasted river horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures in
ills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven.  Ah!  how
instance?  Who aint a slave?  Tell me that.  Well, then, however the old
is one way or other served in much the same way -- either in a physical or
jump from spar to spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow.  And at first,
long time ago.  It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more
metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump is passed
not so.  In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many
of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and sweep down the decks?  What does
of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some unaccountable way --he
officer on ship-board --yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling fowls; --though
once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered,
orchard
other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it.  But
particularly if you come of an old established family in the land, the van
paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single penny
previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been lording it as a
quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking care of
respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind whatsoever.  It is
round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder-blades, and be
sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a whaling voyage; this
sailor, right before the mast, plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there
sea-captains may order me about--however they may thump and punch me about, I
ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not.  And as for going as cook, --
something like this: Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the
speak more respectfully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I
such offices to those who like them.  For my part, I abominate all honorable
that I ever heard of.  On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay.  And
that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New
the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the constant surveillance
the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second
their huge bake-houses the pyramids.  No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple
there is all the difference in the world between paying and being paid.  The
there is no one who will
thieves entailed upon us.  But being paid, --what will compare with it?  The
this sort of thing is unpleasant enough.  It touches one's sense of honor,
though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a sort of
to the royal mast-head.  True, they rather order me about some, and make me
transition is a keen one, I assure you, from the schoolmaster to a sailor,
urbane activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous,
voyage, formed part of the grand programme of Providence that was drawn up a
wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a merchant
will.  It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled
-- The Spouter-Inn: --Peter Coffin.  Coffin? --Spouter? --Rather ominous in that
.. <p 8 >
.. <p 9 >
Crossed Harpoons, and The Sword-Fish? --this, then, must needs be the sign
Ishmael, said I at last; don't you hear?  get away from before the door;
Parliament sitting in Tophet.  A hundred black faces turned round in their
an ash-box in the porch.  Ha!  thought I, ha, as the flying particles almost
and jolly, again thought I, pausing one moment to watch the broad glare in
and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep out the
black-letter, thou reasonest well.  Yes, these eyes are windows, and this
blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing
blackness, not houses, on either hand, and here and there a candle, like a
body of mine is the house.  What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the
came to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which
candle moving about in a tomb.  At this hour of the night, of the last day of
cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.  Such dreary streets!  Blocks of
choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city, Gomorrah?  But The
crannies though, and thrust in a little lint here and there.  But it's too
followed the streets that took me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the
foot against the flinty projections, because from hard, remorseless
from the docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up,
glazier.  True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my mind --old
is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago.  Poor Lazarus
late to make any improvements now.  The universe is finished; the copestone
leaning over sadly.  It stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that tempestuous
light looked so dim, and the place, for the time, looked
might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt district, and as the
night; how Orion glitters; what northern lights!  Let them talk of their
of The Trap.  However, I picked myself up and hearing a loud voice within,
of making my own summer with my own coals.  But what thinks Lazarus?  Can he
of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon, says an old writer --of whose
off his tatters with his shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags,
one in-doors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.  In judging
oriental summer climes of everlasting conservatories; give me the privilege
particular connexion, thought I. But it is a common name in Nantucket,
pulpit.  It was a negro church; and the preacher's text was about the
pushed on and opened a second, interior door.  It seemed the great Black
queer sort of place --a gable-ended old house, one side palsied as it were, and
quiet enough, and the dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it
representing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words underneath
rows to peer; and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was beating a book in a
saw a swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly
service the soles of my boots were in a most miserable plight.  Too expensive
sign of The Trap!  Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far
stood invitingly open.  It had a careless look, as if it were meant for the
swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought that here
tempestuous Euroclydon.  Euroclydon!  says old Dives, in his red silken
the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only
the outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where
the street, and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within.  But go on,
the week, that quarter of the town proved all but deserted.  But presently I
there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking
there.  Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment at the
they say, and I suppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there.  As the
thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement, --rather weary for me, when I struck my
tossed craft.  Euroclydon, nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any
uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I did was to stumble over
warm his blue hands by holding them up to the grand northern lights?  Would
was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea coffee.  It was a
whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on
wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about poor Paul's
works I possess the only copy extant -- it maketh a marvellous difference,
wrapper --(he had a redder one afterwards) pooh, pooh!  What a fine frosty
your patched boots are stopping the way.  So on I went.  I now by instinct
.. <p 13 >
.. <p 14 >
Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way --cut through
Fill to this mark, and your charge is but a penny; to this a penny more;
I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should ever do
Iceland --no fire at all  --the landlord said he couldn't afford it.  Nothing
One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself to these dumplings in
Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den --the
Supper 'll be ready directly.  I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all
Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not what
a most direful manner.  My boy, said the landlord, you'll have the
a whalin', so you'd better get used to that sort of thing.
accommodated with a room, received for answer that his house was full --not a
almost drive beneath it.  within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old
and so on to the full glass --the Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down
another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed they called him), bustles a
away at the space between his legs.  he was trying his hand at a ship under
bar-- a rude attempt at a right whale's head.  Be that how it may, there
bed unoccupied.  But avast, he added, tapping his forehead, you haint no
before I did.
blanket.  I thought so.  All right; take a seat.  Supper? --you want supper?
but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet.  We were fain to
button up our monkey jackets, and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with
dark complexioned harpooneer.  At any rate, I made up my mind that if it
decanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like
decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander further about a strange town
deliriums and death.  Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his
don't--he eats nothing but steaks, and likes 'em rare.  The devil he does,
else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the evening as a
filled with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks.
five of us were summoned to our meal in an adjoining room.  It was cold as
for a shilling.  Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen
full sail, but he didn't make much headway, I thought.  At last some four or
further adorning it with his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working
gathered about a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of
glasses deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom.  Parallel
harpooneer, is it?  Oh, no, said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny,
howling night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously.  On one
landlord cried, That's the Grampus's crew.  I seed her reported in the
landlord) really had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not
little withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the sailors
looker on.  Presently a rioting noise was heard without.  Starting up, the
low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you
meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets.
nightmare to a dead sartainty.  Landlord, I whispered, that aint the
objections to sharing a harpooneer's blanket, have ye?  I s'pose you are goin'
offing this morning; a three years' voyage, and a full ship.  Hurrah, boys;
on so bitter a night, I would put up with the half of any decent man's
only meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens!  dumplings for supper!
our half frozen fingers.  But the fare was of the most substantial kind --not
over like a bench on the Battery.  At one end a ruminating tar was still
poison.  Though true cylinders without --within, the villanous green goggling
round --you enter the public room.  A still duskier place is this, with such
says I. Where is that harpooneer?  Is he here?  He'll be here afore long,
side stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases,
skrimshander.  I sought the landlord, and telling him I desired to be
so turned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into bed
so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that if he (the
stands the vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might
the harpooneer is a dark complexioned chap.  He never eats dumplings, he
travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the hump.
was the answer.  I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this
what in old times must have been a great central chimney with fire-places all
would almost fancy you trod some old craft's cockpits, especially of such a



     Do you pretend to say, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged
     Landlord, said I, going up to him as cool as Mt.  Hecla in a snow storm,
     With heads to be sure; ain't there too many heads in the world?  I tell
-- landlord, stop whittling.  You and I must understand one another, and
--yes, he's the bird what catches the worm. --But to-night he went out a
.. <p 17 >
.. <p 18 >
But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes, and
a chap is he --does he always keep such late hours?  It was now hard upon
against this unknown harpooneer.  Thinks I, I'll wait awhile; he must be
air over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never do
another grin, and throwing them into the great stove in the middle of the
answered, generally he's an early bird -- airley to bed and airley to rise
around this town?  That's precisely it, said the landlord, and I told him
at all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one from
bamboozingly story is this you are telling me?  getting into a towering rage.
began to think that after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices
bench in the room was about four inches higher than the planed one --so there
can only give me half a one; that the other half belongs to a certain
chance of spending a sufferable night unless in some other person's bed, I
clear space against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my back
could be mended with a chair.  But it was a foot too narrow, and the other
could make eider down of a pine plank.  So gathering up the shavings with
devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn't I steal a march on
dismissed it.  For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I
dropping in before long.  I'll have a good look at him then, and perhaps we
going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.  Landlord!  said I, what sort of
harpooneer hears you a slanderin' his head.  I'll break it for him, said I,
harpooneer.  And about this harpooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you
he couldn't sell it here, the market's overstocked.  With what?  shouted I.
him --bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the
immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the night.  The
in all respects safe to spend the night with him.  And in the first place,
intimate and confidential one in the highest degree.  I now demand of you to
landlord's.  It's broke a'ready, said he.  Broke, said I -- broke, do you
may be, he can't sell his head.  Can't sell his head? --What sort of a
may become jolly good bedfellows after all --there's no telling.
mean?  Sartain, and that's the very reason he can't sell it, I guess.
most violent knockings?  it seemed no bad idea; but upon second thoughts I
now flying into a passion again at this unaccountable farrago of the
peddling, you see, and I don't see what on airth keeps him so late, unless,
persist in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories, tending
popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all
ready to knock me down!  Still, looking around me again, and seeing no possible
room, he went about his business, and left me in a brown study.  I now took
seemed to be mightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension.  No, he
soft enough to suit me, and I did not know how all the planing in the world
speak out and tell me who and what this harpooneer is, and whether I shall be
that too without delay.  I come to your house and want a bed; you tell me you
that yarn to me --I'm not green.  May be not, taking out a stick and
the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too short; but that
the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the
this blessed Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head
to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom
to settle down in.  But I soon found that there came such a draught of cold
twelve o'clock.  The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and
was no yoking them.  I then placed the first bench lengthwise along the only
whittling a toothpick, but I rayther guess you'll be done brown if that ere
you design for my bedfellow --a sort of connexion, landlord, which is an
you what it is, landlord, said I, quite calmly, you'd better stop spinning
you will be so good as to unsay that story about selling his head, which if
.. <p 21 >
.. <p 22 >
He now took off his hat --a new beaver hat --when I came nigh singing out with
I bolted a dinner.  Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the
Ignorance is the parent of fear, and being completely nonplussed and
Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his
New Zealand head --a ghastly thing enough --and crammed it down into the bag.
Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room, he then took the
as I was, and remembering what the landlord said about the harpooneer's not
bedfellow; he's been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just
blackish looking squares.  Yes, it's just as I thought, he's a terrible
but I rolled about a good deal, and could not sleep for a long time.  At
but jumped out of my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light
candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then began
chest and arms.  As I live, these covered parts of him were checkered with
coming home at all that night, it being so very late, I made no more ado,
completely independent of the squares of tattooing.  To be sure, it might be
confounded about the stranger, i confess i was now as much afraid of him as if
difficulty having opened his bag, he commenced fumbling in it, and presently
effects upon the skin.  Now, while all these ideas were passing through me
falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed by them.  I concluded that this
first I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of the truth
fresh surprise.  There was no hair on his head --none to speak of at least --
from the surgeon.  But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards
harpooneer, in the course of his distant voyages, must have met with a
head now looked for all the world like a mildewed skull.  Had not the stranger
his unearthly complexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about, and
however, he turned round --when, good heavens!  what a sight!  Such a face!  It
in the South Seas; and perhaps the sun there produced these extraordinary
in the room.  I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted for
inexplicable in him.
it was the devil himself who had thus broken into my room at the dead of
last I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a good offing
light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the other, the
like lightning, this harpooneer never noticed me at all.  But, after some
mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery, there is no telling,
middle of the room thinking.  I then took off my coat, and thought a little
more in my shirt sleeves.  But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed
night.  In fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game enough just then
nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning; but I never heard of a hot sun's
nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead.  His bald purplish
occurred to me.  I remembered a story of a white man --a whaleman too--who,
of this head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension.
outside; a man can be honest in any sort of skin.  But then, what to make of
perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken to.  Holding a
pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a seal-skin wallet with the hair on.
saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door.  Lord save me,
similar adventure.  And what is it, thought I, after all!  It's only his
some time while employed in unlacing the bag's mouth.  This accomplished,
squares; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years' War, and just escaped from
stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quicker than ever
stranger entered the room, and without looking towards the bed, placed his
tanning a white man into a purplish yellow one.  However, I had never been
the bed-side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood in the
the light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all,
the same squares as his face; his back, too, was all over the same dark
thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head-peddler.  But I lay
those black squares on his cheeks.  they were stains of some sort or other.  At
to address him, and demand a satisfactory answer concerning what seemed
towards the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and
tumbled into bed, and commended myself to the care of heaven.  Whether that
was of a dark purplish, yellow color, here and there stuck over with large,
window, but it was the second floor back.  I am no coward, but what to make
working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being

     Upon waking next morning about daylight,
.. < chapter iv 2  THE COUNTERPANE >
.. <p 25 >
.. <p 26 >
I found Queequeg's arm thrown over me in the most loving and affectionate
I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it
My sensations were strange.  Let me try to explain them.  When I was a child,
This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely motioned
a man smoking in bed with me.  It's dangerous.  Besides, I aint insured.
afternoon of the 21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere.  I
again and go to sleep.  Queequeg, look here --you sabbee me, I sabbee you --this
and my stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or
arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan labyrinth of a
away at his pipe and sitting up in bed.  You gettee in, he added, motioning
bed!  the small of my back ached to think of it.  And it was so light too;
beseeching her as a particular favor to give me a good slippering for my
broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have ever done since, even
chimney and packed me off to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the
comely looking cannibal.  What's all this fuss I have been making about,
crawl up the chimney, as i had seen a little sweep do a few days previous;
darkness.  Instantly I felt a shock running through all my frame; nothing was
dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before I could hope
dreams --I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was now wrapped in outer
feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw myself at her feet,
felt dreadfully.  But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my
figure, no two parts of which were of one precise shade --owing I suppose to
for a resurrection.  Sixteen hours in
from the greatest subsequent misfortunes.  At last I must have fallen into a
from the quilt, they so blended their hues together; and it was only by the
his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his shirt
it; --didn't I tell ye, he was peddlin' heads around town? --but turn flukes
leg of ye.  Good night, landlord, said I, you may go.  I turned in, and
little room in the third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as
looked for all the world like a strip of that same patchwork quilt.  Indeed,
looking at him a moment.  For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean,
man sleepe you --you sabbee?  Me sabbee plenty --grunted Queequeg, puffing
manner.  You had almost thought I had been his wife.  The counterpane was of
me to get into bed --rolling over to one side as much as to say --I wont touch a
misbehavior; anything indeed but condemning me to lie abed such an
much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him.  Better sleep with a
never slept better in my life.
partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke, I could hardly tell it
patchwork, full of odd little parti-colored squares and triangles; and this
sending me to bed supperless, --my mother dragged me by the legs out of the
sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me.
sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times --this same arm of his, I say,
sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.  Landlord, said I, tell him to
stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or whatever you call it; tell him to
stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room.  For several hours I lay there
stop smoking, in short, and I will turn in with him.  But I don't fancy having
streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house.  I felt worse and
tell me that that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?  I thought ye know'd
the sun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in the
this in not only a civil but a really kind and charitable way.  I stood
this.  I had been cutting up some caper or other --I think it was trying to
thought i to myself --the man's a human being just as I am: he has just as
to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural hand seemed
to kill time, and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.  I lay there
to me with his tomahawk, and throwing the clothes to one side.  He really did
troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from it --half steeped in
unendurable length of time.  But she was the best and most conscientious of
was a reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle.  The circumstance was
worse --at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in my stockinged


     Grub, ho!  now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to
     I quickly followed suit, and descending into
.. < chapter v 5  BREAKFAST >
.. <p 29 >
.. <p 29 >
.. <p 30 >
Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo's performances -- this kind of travel,
Christian would have washed his face; but Queequeg, to my amazement,
I say, may not be the very best mode of attaining a high social polish.
Ledyard, the great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of
Queequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots on; I
Queequeg?  which, barred with various tints, seemed like the Andes' western
Still, for the most part, that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.  These
a bitter cold morning.  Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window,
accustomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones -- probably not
all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlor.  But perhaps the
and that the street being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain
and then proceeded to wash himself.  At that time in the morning any
be backward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in
begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and
bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous scraping, or rather
brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all wearing
breakfast.  They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at
cheek like
chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea carpenters, and sea
complexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly bleached
contented himself with restricting his ablutions to his chest, arms, and
coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a brown and
cutlery with a vengeance.  Afterwards I wondered the less at this operation
ease in manner, quite self-possessed in company.  Not always, though:
exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.
face.  I was watching to see where he kept his razor, when lo and behold, he
hands.  He then donned his waistcoat, and taking up a piece of hard soap on
harpooning of his cheeks.  Thinks I, Queequeg, this is using Rogers's best
his own proper person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not
like a marshal's baton.
made to order either --rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of
malice towards him, though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the
matter of my bedfellow.  However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and
mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the
monkey jackets for morning gowns.  You could pretty plainly tell how long each
now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night previous, and
one had been ashore.  This young fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted
particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as possible.  He complied,
pear in hue, and would seem to smell almost as musky; he cannot have been
rather too scarce a good thing; the more's the pity.  So, if any one man, in
room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his harpoon
shades lighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him.  In the
slope, to show forth in one array, contrasting climates, zone by zone.
sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for.  The bar-room was
takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long wooden stock,
taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of
that way.  And the man that has anything bountifully laughable about him, be
the bar-room accosted the grinning landlord very pleasantly.  I cherished no
the rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of the
the wash-stand centre-table, dipped it into water and commenced lathering his
three days landed from his Indian voyage.  That man next him looks a few
unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot, and striding up to the
view into the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure that
when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how
whom I had not as yet had a good look at.  They were nearly all whalemen;
withal; he doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore.  But who could show a

     In this same New Bedford there stands a
.  This Marble Is
.  This Tablet Is erected to his
.. < chapter vii 26  THE CHAPEL >
.. <p 33 >
.. <p 34 >
.. <p 35 >
Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans.  One and all, they were harpooned and
Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.  The streets do not run with milk;
Desolation, off Patagonia, November 1st,
Entering, I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors'
Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot.  I am
Memory By his Sister.  Sacred To the Memory of Robert Long, Willis Ellery,
Nathan Coleman, Walter Canny, Seth Macy, and Samuel Gleig, Forming one of the
Puritanic sands.
Sacred To the Memory of The late Captain Ezekiel Hardy, Who in the bows of
Still New Bedford is a queer place.  Had it not been for us whalemen, that
Talbot, Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard, Near the Isle of
This Tablet Is erected to his Memory by His Widow.  Shaking off the sleet
Whaleman's Chapel, and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the
You must go to New Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say, they
air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer
and gardens more opulent, than in New Bedford.  Whence came they?  how planted
answered.  Yes; all these brave houses and flowery gardens came from the
as though they were drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the
boats' crews of the Ship Eliza, Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On
bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown aside at
chaplain had not yet arrived; and there these silent islands of men and women
coast of Labrador.  As it is, parts of her back country are enough to frighten
creation's final day.  And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own
dragged up hither from the bottom of the sea.  Can Herr Alexander perform a
emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty mansion, and your question will be
feat like that?  In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to
following, but I do not pretend to quote: -- Sacred To the Memory of John
from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated myself near the door, and
from the other, as if each silent grief were insular and incommunicable.  The
full of fine maples --long avenues of green and gold.  And in August, high in
girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off shore,
have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklessly burn their
here placed by their surviving Shipmates.
his boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, August 3d,
in, in all New England.  It is a land of oil, true enough; but not like
into the wall on either side the pulpit.  Three of them ran something like the
lengths in spermaceti candles.  In summer time, the town is sweet to see;
nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs.  Yet, in spite of
of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm.
omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New Bedford has superinduced
one, they look so bony.  The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live
out upon this special errand.  The sky had changed from clear,
red roses.  But roses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of
sat steadfastly eyeing several marble tablets, with black borders, masoned
shrieks of the storm.  Each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart
sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.  Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket
sure that I did not.  Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied
that bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young
the Off-shore Ground in the Pacific, December 31st,
the passer-by their tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms.  So
their cheeks is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens.  Elsewhere match
their daughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.
this, nowhere in all America will you find more patrician-like houses; parks
tract of land would this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the
upon this once scraggy scoria of a country?  Go and gaze upon the iron
wives and widows.  A muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the
.. < chapter ix 23  THE SERMON >
.. <p 38 >
.. <p 39 >
Between the marble cenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which
God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for favorable winds.  Yes, the
I observed that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had not come in his
Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I
No, thought I, there must be some sober reason for this thing; furthermore,
a perpendicular side ladder, like those used in mounting
a ship from a boat at sea.  The wife of a whaling captain had provided the
all outward worldly ties and connexions?  Yes, for replenished with the meat
already small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had acted upon the
and wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a
arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.  Like most old
bad taste.  Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
bear a hardy helm; for lo!  the sun is breaking through; the clouds are
beating against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowy
being itself nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany color, the whole
breakers.  But high above the
carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet, and his great
case with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of
chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which,
contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in
could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of the stage.
descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt.  From thence it is the
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of
ever this earth's foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit
fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a regular stairs to
feature of the place, borrowed from the chaplain's former sea-farings.
fiddle-headed beak.  What could be more full of meaning? --for the pulpit is
flying scud and dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight,
formed its back was adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship
from which beamed forth an angel's face; and this bright face shed a distinct
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a
him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had led.  When he entered
hint of Father Mapple, and finished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting
his vessel.  the perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the
interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical peculiarities about
is its prow.
it must symbolize something unseen.  Can it be, then, that by that act of
joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary.  For I was not prepared to
leads the world.  From thence it is the storm of God's quick wrath is first
look upwards, and then with a truly sailorlike but still reverential
of water within the walls.  But the side ladder was not the only strange
one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner; when,
over the pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till the whole
panelled front was in the likeness of a ship's bluff bows, and the Holy Bible
physical isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from
pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with the weight of
plate now inserted into the Victory's plank where Nelson fell.  Ah, noble
pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.  Father
pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these
rested on the projecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship's
rolling off --serenest azure is at hand.  Nor was the pulpit itself without a
see Father Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn round, and stooping
self-containing stronghold --a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well
ship, the angel seemed to say, beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and
spot of radiance upon the ship's tossed deck, something like that silver
such a height would, by its long angle with the floor, seriously contract the
the water it had absorbed.  However, hat and coat and overshoes were one by
trace of the same sea-taste that had achieved the ladder and the picture.  Its
was deposited within, leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.  I
wood, so that at every step there was a joint.  At my first glimpse of the
world's a ship on its passage out, and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit




     For the instant he almost turns to flee again.  But he rallies.  "I seek a
     He rings every coin to find a counterfeit.  Not a forger, any way, he mutters;
     and Jonah is put down for his passage.  "Point out my state-room, Sir," says
     and without a passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all
.. <p 42 >
.. <p 43 >
Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the moment desist from hoisting in
Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something about the doors of
I guess he's the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, or belike, one of
Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicions still molest the Captain.
Jonah now.  "I'm travel-weary; I need sleep." "Thou look'st like it," says
Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he can be no innocent.  In
advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.  "Who's
against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship is moored, offering five
assented to.  Then the Captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the
away the Captain from that scent.  "I'll sail with ye," --he says, --"the
boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.  He will not
burglar hastening to cross the seas.  So disordered, self-condemning is his
but no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing
but the lock contains no key.  Hearing him foolishly fumbling there, the
captain had not looked up to jonah, though the man now stands before him;
confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion.  So he makes
convicts' cells being never allowed to be locked within.  All dressed and
description of his person.  He reads, and looks from Jonah to the bill;
discernment detects crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the
dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth, and finds the little
ere he judge him openly.  He charges him thrice the usual sum; and it's
ere he touched a deck.  How plainly he's a fugitive!  no baggage, not a
for the Customs --"who's there?"  Oh!  how that harmless question mangles Jonah!
frontiers.  So Jonah's Captain prepares to test the length of Jonah's purse,
glance.  "We sail with the next coming tide," at last he slowly answered,
guilty eye, skulking from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile
hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag, --no friends accompany him to the wharf with
hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a parricide, and containing a
jonah gasps.  then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too, beneath the ship's
look, that had there been policemen in
money, how much is that, --I'll pay now."  For it is particularly written,
paid the fare thereof" ere the craft did sail.  And taken with the context,
passage
passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?"  Thus far the busy
penniless.  In this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely,
receiving the last items of her cargo; and as he steps on board to see its
robbed a widow;" or,"Joe, do you mark him; he's a bigamist;" or,"Harry lad,
same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with gold.  Yet when
shipmates, as if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history,"that he
state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead.  The air is close, and
still intently eyeing him.  "No sooner, sir?" --"Soon enough for any honest man
that goes a passenger."  Ha!  Jonah, that's another stab.  But he swiftly calls
the Captain, "there's thy room."  Jonah enters, and would lock the door,
the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that is
the goods, to mark the stranger's evil eye.  Jonah sees this; but in vain he
the missing murderers from Sodom."  Another runs to read the bill that's stuck
their adieux.  At last, after much dodging search, he finds the Tarshish ship
their gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to the other --"Jack, he's
their hands upon him.  Frighted Jonah trembles, and summoning all his
there?" cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making out his papers
this is full of meaning.  Now Jonah's Captain, shipmates, was one whose
those days, jonah, on the mere suspicion of something wrong, had been arrested
tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain essays his wretched smile.
while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay


     himself with this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still
     his sake this great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him,
.. <p 46 >
.. <p 47 >
God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living gulfs of
Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but I do place him before you as a
Jonah.  While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,
Joppa.  But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached.  As we have seen,
Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten --his ears, like two
a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops seething
a wicked nineveh, jonah, appalled at the hostility he should raise, fled from
and bowing his head lowly, with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest
and earth; and"vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;" when the word of the
and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to me as a pilot of
and seek by other means to save the ship.  But all in vain; the indignant
and still more to me, for I am a greater sinner than ye.  And now how gladly
are pitiful.  For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, since he
as an anchor and dropped into the sea; when instantly an oily calmness floats
at last, standing motionless, with closed eyes, for the moment, seemed
awaiting him; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like the Lord out
be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye,
breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air
brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made all his simple hearers look
but too well knew the darkness of his deserts, --when wretched Jonah cries out
chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed the warring
communing with God and himself.  But again he leaned over towards the people,
confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
deliverance of him from the sea and the whale.  Shipmates, I do not place
describing Jonah's sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.  His deep
doom, and with swift slantings tore him along"into the midst of the seas,"
dreadful punishment is just.  He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting
elements at work; and the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came
gale howls louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried.  Then God spake unto the
hell" --when the whale grounded upon the ocean's utmost bones, even then, God
him, leaving smooth water behind.  He goes down in the whirling heart of such
him.  Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet --"out of the belly of
his look, as he silently turned over the leaves of the Book once more; and,
his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by taking ship at
his prison.  Then Jonah prayed unto learn a weighty lesson.  For sinful as he
humility, he spake these words: Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon
into the yawning jaws
is, Jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance.  He feels that his
look towards His holy temple.  And here, shipmates, is true and faithful
model for repentance.  Sin not; but if you do, take heed to repent of it like
of the fish's belly.  But observe his prayer, and so many white bolts, upon
on him with a quick fear that was strange to them.  There now came a lull in
other they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.  And now behold Jonah taken up
out from the east, and the sea is still, as Jonah carries down the gale with
pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah, is shown in the eventual
repentance; not clamorous for pardon, but grateful for punishment.  And how
sea-shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean --Jonah did the
sit, and listen as you listen, while some one of you reads me that other
slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who, when
the living God.  How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or speaker of true
things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of
to them to take him and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for
were wrapped about his head," and all the watery world of woe bowled over
where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and"the weeds
would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you
you; both his hands press upon me.  I have read ye by what murky light may
.. <p 50 >
.. <p 51 >
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him; and
Horn, that is --which was the only way he could get there --thrown among people
I began to be sensible of strange feelings.  I felt a melting in me.  No
I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I thought this
Washington's head, as seen in the popular busts of him.  It had the same long
an excellent one.  It may seem ridiculous, but it reminded me of General
and bland deceits.  Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet I began
and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile.  At first he little
and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff.  And then we sat exchanging puffs
as strange to him as though he were in the planet Jupiter; and yet he seemed
bedfellows.  I told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased, perhaps a
but hollow courtesy.  I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly signs
companionship; always equal to himself.  Surely this was a touch of fine
conscious of so living or so striving.  So soon as I hear that such or such a
country's phrase, that we were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if
entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost serenity; content with his own
evening shades and phantoms gathering round the casements, and peering in
exactly how to take them.  At first they are overawing; their calm
from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it regularly passing between us.  If
in this famous town.  Soon I proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch
indifference of his
indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized hypocrisies
intensity has warmed the air, it then only glows to be looked at; the
it.  Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from home, by the way of Cape
little complimented.  We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored
lonely room; the fire burning low, in that mild stage when, after its first
man gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspeptic
me.  I'll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness has proved
more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish
much as a single glance; but appeared wholly occupied with counting the
need should be.  In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
night's hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be
noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last
old woman, he must have broken his digester.  As I sat there in that now
pages of the marvellous book.  Considering how sociably we had been sleeping
philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard there was such a thing as
pictures that were in it.  Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we
regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows, which were likewise
round the waist, and said that henceforth we were married; meaning, in his
scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be looking out at the storm from
seamen in the inn.  He made no advances whatever; appeared to have no desire
seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic wisdom.  I had noticed also
singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was something almost sublime in
that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very little, with the other
that.  But, perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals should not be
the casement, he never heeded my presence, never troubled himself with so
there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan's breast,
this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.
to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances.  All this struck me as mighty
to explain to him the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few
to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him.  And those same things that
together the night previous, and especially considering the affectionate arm
upon us silent, solitary twain; the storm booming without in solemn swells;
very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded on top.  Queequeg
very strange.  But savages are strange beings; at times you do not know
was George Washington cannibalistically developed.  Whilst I was thus closely
went to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to be seen
when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine, clasped me
will not venture to decide; but certain it was his head was phrenologically
world.  This soothing savage had redeemed it.  There he sat, his very
would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus drew



     Queequeg was a native of Kokovoko, an
     and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the
     the island.  On one side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of
.. < chapter xii 21  BIOGRAPHICAL >
.. <p 54 >
.. <p 54 >
.. <p 55 >
His father was a High Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the
Queequeg smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such
There was excellent blood in his veins --royal stuff; though
asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes shut, in order the
begged him to go on and tell it.  He gladly complied.  Though at the time I
but he now spoke of his native island; and, eager to hear his history, I
but ill comprehended not a few of his words, yet subsequent disclosures,
comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend.  With our
content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities, Queequeg disdained no
could prevail.  But Queequeg vowed a vow.  Alone in his canoe, he paddled off
dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last
desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two.
down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him.  But like Czar Peter
down in the stern, paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by,
feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if darkness were
foot capsized and sank his canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing
green sapling; even then, in Queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strong
he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk.  Be it
him overboard; suspended a cutlass over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the
himself at full length upon the deck, grappled a ringbolt there, and swore not
his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat
illuminated by the flame of the new-lit lamp.  Whether it was that this
indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more congenial to
island far away to the West and South.  It is not down in any map; true
land, covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into the water.  Hiding
like a flash he darted out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his
love once comes to bend them.  For now I liked nothing better than to have
maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors.
more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed.  Because no man can ever
of seamen, spurned his suit; and not all the King his father's influence
our clayey part.  Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant
places never are.  When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native
policy of insurance.  I was only alive to the condensed confidential
present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give.
relented, and told him he might make himself at home.  But this fine young
revulsion.  Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it
sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal propensity he nourished in his
said, that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in
savage --this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the captain's cabin.  They put him
seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the power of enlightening
serene household joy then.  I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord's
shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one
son of a King, and Queequeg budged not.  Struck by his desperate
sought a passage to Christian lands.  But the ship, having her full complement
the bed the night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when
to a distant strait, which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted
to let it go, though hacked in pieces.  In vain the captain threatened to throw
to the other, till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke,
undulating tester rolled the savage away to far distant scenes, I know not,
unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
untutored youth.  A Sag Harbor ship visited his father's bay, and Queequeg
were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides
when I had become more familiar with his broken phraseology, now enable me to
woodlands in a grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a


     Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an
     what you tink now, --Didn't our people laugh?  At last, passage paid, and
.. <p 58 >
.. <p 59 >
I, Queequeg, you might have known better than that, one would think.  Didn't
King's own house --the Captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punch
Rokovoko, and its commander --from all accounts, a very stately punctilious
Tartar air! --how I spurned that turnpike earth! --that common highway all over
a ship --as having plain precedence over a mere island King, especially in the
about the thing --though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the precise
air; then slightly
all glittering in the clear, cold air.  Huge hills and mountains of casks on
almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
and centre of all verdure.  Queequeg caught one of these young saplings
at such times look downwards to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying
being said, the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of
bowl; --taking it i suppose for a huge finger-glass.  now, said Queequeg,
brows as a slave before the Sultan.  Sideways leaning, we sideways darted;
bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come from the heart
by the plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeering
canes in land tornadoes.  So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood
carpenters and coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the
casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering whale
cottage, this Captain marches in, and being assigned the post of honor,
dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned me to admire the
endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort.  Gaining the
every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; the two tall masts buckling like Indian
fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were anything
foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.  His dusky nostrils
gentleman, at least for a sea captain --this commander was invited to the
glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that two
have their grace as well as we --though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who
his majesty the King, Queequeg's father.  Grace being said, -- for those people
in which to carry his heavy chest to his boarding house.  Not to seem ignorant
island of Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant
it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf.  Why, said
luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.  Hoisting sail, it glided down
magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records.  At the same
mimicking him behind his back.  I thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come.
more dignified than a whitewashed negro.  But there were some boobies and
more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little Moss tossed the
one side, New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees
only begins a third, and so on, for ever and for aye.  Such is the
our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast; ducked and dived her
perilous and long voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended,
pitch, all betokening that new cruises were on the start; that one most
placed himself over against the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and
quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings.  How I snuffed that
ships lay silent and safely moored at last; while from others came a sound of
swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth.  On, on we flew, and
ten.  Well; when all the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboo
the Acushnet river.  On
the Priest, and noting the ceremony, and thinking himself --being Captain of
the bowl before the blessed beverage circulates.  Seeing himself placed next
the ducks, glance upwards to the great Giver of all feasts --Grace, I say,
the island; that is, dipping his consecrated and consecrating fingers into
the people laugh?  Upon this, he told me another story.  The people of his
this punchbowl always forms the great central ornament on the braided mat
water of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and
way in which to manage the barrow --Queequeg puts his chest upon it; lashes
wedding feast of Queequeg's sister, a pretty young princess just turned of
where the feast is held.  Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at




     It was quite late in the evening when the
     deep itself.  The Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea; he
     that they are so shut up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and
     which a noah's flood would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the
.. < chapter xv 27  CHOWDER >
.. <p 63 >
.. <p 63 >
.. <p 64 >
English overswarm all India, and hang out their blazing banner from the sun;
Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by
Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that his
Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome; that people
Poland.  Let America add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the
The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey
alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships; to and fro ploughing it
as his own special plantation.  There is his home; there lies his business,
assaults!  And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing
be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and
between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight of land,
beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in
boats and captured cod; and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they
could attend to no business that day, at least none but a supper and a bed.
declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived
floating forts; even pirates and privateers, though following the sea as
found an empty ivory casket, --the poor little Indian's skeleton.  What wonder,
from their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like
furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his very pillow rush
herds of walruses and whales.
hides among the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps.  For
highwaymen the road, they but plunder other ships, other fragments of the
his; he owns it, as Emperors own empires; other seamen having but a right
land like themselves, without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless
like another world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman.  With
little Moss came snugly to anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we
livelihood!  They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand; grown bolder,
loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide
made an utter island of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables
millions in China.  He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie; he
of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to
of way through it.  Merchant ships are but extension bridges; armed ones but
prairie; that they wear quicksand shoes, something like Laplander snowshoes;
round it; peeped in at Behring's Straits; and in all seasons and all oceans
sea, explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of circumnavigations
small clams will sometimes be found adhering, as to the backs of sea
so many Alexanders; parcelling out among
the New England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his talons.  With
the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous!  That Himmalehan, salt-sea
the landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep
the red-men.  Thus goes the legend.  In olden times an eagle swooped down upon
them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers did
then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take to the sea for a
there plant toadstools before their houses, to get under the shade in summer
they waded out with nets for mackerel; more experienced, they pushed off in
time; that one blade of grass makes an oasis, three blades in a day's walk a
turtles.  But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.
two thirds of this terraqueous globe are the Nantucketer's.  For the sea is
very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious
waters.  They resolved to follow in the same direction.  Setting out in their
years he knows not the land; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells


     Because it's dangerous, says she.  Ever since young Stiggs coming from that
     In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.
--and Yojo had told him two or three times over, and strongly insisted upon it
.. < chapter xvi 2  THE SHIP >
.. <p 67 >
.. <p 68 >
But to my surprise and no small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand,
Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its name;
Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo's judgment and
Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her
Queequeg's, or rather Yojo's, touching the selection of our craft; I did not
Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl?  Where's your harpoon?
Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo warming himself at
Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo
There was a fishy flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account
Yojo in our little bedroom --for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or
acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a
and Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin.
and the pequod.  devil- dam, i do not know the origin of; tit-bit is
arm, and demanded his harpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers.  Why
as a rather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole,
as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged to
but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.  Now, this plan of
chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself, for the present
chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for
dangerous weepons in their rooms at night.  So, Mr. Queequeg (for she had
day; how it was I never could find out, for, though I applied myself to it
determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should quickly settle that
directions from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as
earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me,
everyway, that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in
fish-bones coming through your clothes.  The area before the house was paved
fishermen's boats, I saw Hosea's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and
for the pots there were always boiling chowders.  Chowder for breakfast, and
for, till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some
harbor, and in concert selecting our craft; instead of this, I say, Yojo
harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich
head?  What's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people?  But look,
his sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the shipping.  After
inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us; and, in order to do so, had already
infallibly light upon, for all the world as though it had turned out by
irrespective of Queequeg.  I have forgotten to mention that, in many things,
learned his name), I will just take this here iron, and keep it for you till
like that plan at all.  I had not a little relied on Queequeg's sagacity to
marching along the sand with each foot in a cod's decapitated head, looking
morning.  But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast, men?  Both,
much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt that there
not?  said I; every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon --but why not?
obvious; Pequod, you will no doubt remember, was the name of a celebrated
pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should
point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely.  But
says I; and let's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.
several times, I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles --leaving
surprising forecast of things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem,
that
that he had been diligently consulting Yojo --the name of his black little god
three barrels of ile, was found dead in my first floor back, with his
trifling little affair.  Next morning early, leaving Queequeg shut up with
unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone four years and a half, with only
very slip-shod, I assure ye.  Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and
were three ships up for three-years' voyages --The Devil-Dam the Tit-bit,
with clam-shells.  Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra;





     What do you mean, sir?  Was the other one lost by a whale?  Lost by a whale!
     Who is Captain Ahab, sir?  Aye, aye, I thought so.  Captain Ahab is the
     Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed up, crunched by the
     thy last Captain, didst thou? --Dost not think of murdering the officers when
--ever been in a stove boat?  No, Sir, I never have.  Dost know nothing at
.. <p 71 >
.. <p 72 >
Captain Ahab?
Captain himself.  Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg --that's who ye are
Captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of him?  he demanded.  I was
Captain of this ship.  I am mistaken then.  I thought I was speaking to the
Pequod fitted out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including
Pequod?  said I, advancing to the door of the tent.  Supposing it be the
Vineyard.  But what takes thee a-whaling?  I want to know that before I think
about what whaling is; do ye yet feel inclined for it?  I do, sir.  Very
alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at the hearty grief in
all about whaling, I dare say --eh?  Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I
and then jump after it?  Answer, quick!  I am, sir, if it should be
causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together.  Such
crew.  We are part owners and agents.  But as I was going to say, if thou
don't take to be the fact.  Good again.  Now then, thou not only wantest to
eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.  Is this the Captain of the
ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed I might have inferred as
flukes!  man, what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh? --it looks a little
go a-whaling, to find out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to
go in order to see the world?  Was not that what ye said?  I thought so.  Well
good.  Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale's throat,
his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I could, What you say is
humorously or in earnest.  But concentrating all his crow's feet into one
insulated Quakerish Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and
lungs are a sort of soft, d'ye see; thou dost not talk shark a bit.  Sure,
monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat! --ah, ah!  I was a little
much from the simple fact of the accident.  Look ye now, young man, thy
no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know there was any peculiar
of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past backing out.  Clap eye
of shipping ye.  Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is.  I want to see
of the marchant service to me again.  Marchant service indeed!  I suppose now
on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt find that he has only one leg.
positively indispensable to do so; not to be got rid of, that is; which I
puzzled by this curious request, not knowing exactly how to take it, whether
rather distrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the
scowl, Captain Peleg started me on the errand.  Going forward and glancing
see that leg? --I'll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest
shall soon learn.  I've been several voyages in the merchant service, and I
speaking to, young man.  It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the
suspicious, don't it, eh? --Hast not been a pirate, hast thou? --Didst not rob
that!  Mind what I said about the marchant service --don't aggravate me --I
the world.  Want to see what whaling is, eh?  Have ye clapped eye on
then back to me and tell me what ye see there.  For a moment I stood a little
then, just step forward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, and
think that-- Merchant service be damned.  Talk not that lingo to me.  Dost
thinking of shipping.  Thou wast, wast thou?  I see thou are no Nantucketer
thou gettest to sea?  I protested my innocence of these things.  I saw that
told you that I had been four voyages in the merchant-- Hard down out of
under the mask of these half humorous inuendoes, this old seaman, as an
wantest to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way
won't have it.  But let us understand each other.  I have given thee a hint
ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships.  But
ye've been to sea before now; sure of that?  Sir, said I, I thought I


     and seated himself at a little table.  I began to think it was high time to
     lays, and that these lays were proportioned to the degree of importance
.. <p 75 >
.. <p 76 >
Bildad, said Peleg, he wants to ship.  Dost thee?  said Bildad, in a
Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and this to save his coat
Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, and
Bildad?  As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,
But I said nothing, only looking round me sharply.  Peleg now threw open a
I was already aware that in the whaling business they paid no wages; but all
I was also aware that being a green hand at whaling, my own lay would not be
Peleg, at it again, Bildad, eh?  Ye have been studying those Scriptures,
The space between the decks was small; and there, bolt-upright, sat old
being an incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard
better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay
broad shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and
captain, and finally a ship-owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
chest, and drawing forth the ship's articles, placed pen and ink before him,
do, said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at his book in a
drab-colored eye intently looking at you, made you feel completely nervous,
especially as Peleg, his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer.
flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft, economical nap to it,
for the clothing I would wear out on it, not to speak of my three years' beef
gore.  How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious Bildad
hands, including the captain, received certain shares of the profits called
hard work out of them.  When Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his
hard-hearted to say the least.  He never used to swear, though, at his men,
his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age
his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, he
his utilitarian character.  On his long, gaunt body, he carried no spare
hollow tone, and turning round to me.  I dost, said I unconsciously, he was
home, were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn
idleness perished from before him.  His own person was the exact embodiment of
like mad, at something or other, never mind what.  Indolence and
like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.  Such, then, was the person that I
little cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a
mumbling tone quite audible.  I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw,
nett proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might eventually amount to.  And
now, for the last thirty years, to my certain knowledge.  How far ye got,
of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his
out.  For a pious man, especially for a Quaker, he was certainly rather
pertaining to the respective duties of the ship's company.
practical world quite another.  This world pays dividends.  Rising from a
reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know; but it did not
sage and sensible conclusion that a man's religion is one thing, and this
saw seated on the transom when I followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin.
seeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.  He says he's our man,
seem to concern him much, and very probably he had long since come to the
seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.  Bildad, cried Captain
settle with myself at what terms I would be willing to engage for the voyage.
should be offered at least the 275th lay --that is, the 275th part of the clear
so intense a Quaker.  What do ye think of him, Bildad?  said Peleg.  He'll
splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt that from all I had heard I
story, that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving
tails.  His broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs were stiffly crossed;
task-master.  They told me in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a curious
they said; but somehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated
though the 275th lay was what they call a rather long lay, yet it was
till you could clutch something --a hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work
very large; but considering that I was used to the sea, could steer a ship,
well-earned income.  Now Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of
yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan



     Come hither to me --hither, hither, said Peleg, with a significance in his
     here needs the grindstone.  That's he; thank ye, Bildad.  Now then, my young
     though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated.  Whew!  he
.. <p 79 >
.. <p 80 >
Ahab of old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!  And a very vile one.  When
And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I had
Any how, young man, he won't always see me, so I don't suppose he will thee.
Bildad, but with a marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that
Captain Peleg.  Well, bring him along then.
He's a queer man, Captain Ahab --so some think --but a good one.  Oh, thou'lt
I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt,
Pequod.  Never say it anywhere.  Captain Ahab did not name himself. 'Twas a
Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.  But I had not
ain't Captain Bildad; no, and he ain't Captain Peleg; he's Ahab, boy; and
and responsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all
brief, that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing concernment of
burying himself.  Oh!  never thee mind about that, Bildad, said Peleg.  Has
captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command; for sometimes these
don't think thou wilt be able to at present.  I don't know exactly what's the
done a good morning's work, and that the Pequod was the identical ship that
enough; thou art shipped.  Yes, but I should like to see him.  But I
eye that almost startled me.  Look ye, lad; never say that on board the
foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when he was
for the three hundredth lay.  Captain Peleg, said I, I have a friend with
gun --a straight wake with ye!  As he thundered out this he made a rush at
hands.  Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain Ahab
he ever whaled it any?  turning to me.  Killed more whales than I can count,
he had, there seemed no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb,
idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded,
impenitent Peleg and his ways.  As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as
in colleges, as well as 'mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than
lance!  aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle!  Oh!  he
leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea.  However, it is always as
like him well enough; no fear, no fear.  he's a grand, ungodly, god-like
man, Captain Ahab; doesn't speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may
man, Ishmael's thy name, didn't ye say?  Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael,
matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house; a sort of sick, and
may tell thee the same.  I wish to warn thee.  It's a lie.  I know Captain
me who wants to ship too --shall I bring him down to-morrow?  To be sure,
my astonishment, he sat down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed
only a twelvemonth old.  And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that
proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the captain with whom I was to
said peleg.  fetch him along, and we'll look at him.  What lay does he
sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a whale-ship
that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port, but
that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not lick his blood?
the name would somehow prove prophetic.  And, perhaps, other fools like her
the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier stranger foes than whales.  His
time eluded him.  Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal
to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing.  He seemed quite used to
used to be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye.  My jack-knife
voyages are so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly
want?  groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in which he had again been
was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg.  But to
was to be found.  And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab?  It's all right
well listen.  Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab's above the common; Ahab's been
well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself into his
whistled at last -- the squall's gone off to leeward, I think.  Bildad, thou
will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board, ere the
yet he don't look so.  In fact, he ain't sick; but no, he isn't well either.




     I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to take a chair; but in vain.  There
     one way nor the other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of
     resisted.  Running down stairs, I quickly stated my suspicions to the first
     which way to it?  Run for God's sake, and fetch something to pry open the
--and with that she seized my arm.  What's the matter with you?  What's the
--might as well kill both birds at once.  Kill?  The Lord be merciful to his
.. <p 83 >
.. <p 84 >
God's sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry it open!  Look here,
Hussey, said I, he's alive at all events; so leave us, if you please, and
I will see to this strange affair myself.  Closing the door upon the landlady,
Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet
active life.  Queequeg, said I, going up to him, Queequeg, what's the
altogether cool and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
apoplexy! --and with these cries, she ran towards the kitchen, I following.
castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime.  Wood-house!  cried I,
constrained; especially, as in all probability he had been sitting so for
countenance.  What's the matter with you, young man?  Get the axe!  For
door --the axe! --the axe!  he's had a stroke; depend upon it! --and so saying I
felt like pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost
gave her to understand the whole case.  Unconsciously clapping the
ghost!  What's that noise there?  You, young man, avast there!  And running
hand free; look here; are you talking about prying open any of my doors?
harpoon was missing.  He's killed himself, she cried.  It's unfort'nate
haven't seen it since I put it there.  Running to a little closet under the
he sat; and all he could do --for all my polite arts and blandishments --he
in for safe keeping.  La!  La, ma'am! --Mistress!  murder!  Mrs. Hussey!
in the other, having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the
interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her
intolerable, it seemed so painfully and unnaturally
landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told me that Queequeg's
landlady.  But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost
matter with you, shipmate?  In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I
matter with you?  He hain't been a sittin' so all day, has he?  said the
me a sign, with --"no suicides permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;"
mother! --it will be the ruin of my house.  Has the poor lad a sister?  Where's
must be the matter.  I went to make the bed after breakfast, and the door
noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming against the wall, sent the
person i met --the chambermaid.  la!  la!  she cried, i thought something
plaster to the ceiling; and there, good heavens!  there sat Queequeg,
said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet, so as to have one
she turned it in the lock; but, alas!  Queequeg's supplemental bolt remained
side-pocket, here's a key that'll fit, I guess; let's see.  And with that,
since.  But I thought, may be, you had both gone off and locked your baggage
squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head.  He looked neither
stiggs done over again --there goes another counterpane --god pity his poor
sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark.  With a prodigious
that girl? --there, Betty, go to Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint
the entry a little, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again
there's one about a mile from here.  But avast!  putting her hand in her
to one side of her nose, she ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed -- No!  I
unwithdrawn within.  Have to burst it open, said I, and was running down
up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force open the door.  I
upwards of eight or ten hours, going too without his regular meals.  Mrs.
vinegar-cruet
vowing I should not break down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a
was locked; and not a mouse to be heard; and it's been just so silent ever
was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey
won't allow it; I won't have my premises spoiled.  Go for the locksmith,
would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor





     As we were walking down the end of the wharf
     First Congregational Church, cried Bildad, what!  that worships in Deacon
     I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeeting, said I,
     all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First
     in that we all join hands.  Splice, thou mean'st splice hands, cried
.. < chapter xviii 2  HIS MARK >
.. <p 87 >
.. <p 88 >
Congregational Church.  He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.  Young man,
Deuteronomy --why Father Mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he's reckoned
Deuteronomy Coleman's meeting-house?  and so saying, taking out his
First Congregation of this whole worshipping world; we all belong to that;
Peleg, drawing nearer.  Young man, you'd better ship for a missionary,
Son of darkness, he added, turning to Queequeg, art thou at present in
a member?  he then said, turning to me; not very long, I rather guess,
a sailor who had visited that very island, and he told me that it was the
about religion made much impression upon Queequeg.  Because, in the first
and cocoanuts; and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with
and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty breakfast of chowders
and every mother's son and soul of us belong; the great and everlasting
by that, Captain Peleg?  said I, now jumping on the bulwarks, and leaving my
communion with any christian church?  Why, said I, he's a member of the
compassion, as though he thought it a great pity that such a sensible young
comrade standing on the wharf.  I mean, he replied, he must show his
considered from his own point of view; and, in the second place, he did not
cried Bildad, is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon Deuteronomy's
custom, when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain
finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true religion
first Congregational Church.  Here be it said, that many tattooed savages
from behind Peleg's, out of the wigwam.  He must show that he's converted.
hard pushed, I replied.  I mean, sir, the same ancient Catholic Church to
his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod, sauntering along, and
in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit
in the yard or garden of the victor; and then, one by one, they were placed
instead of a fore-mast hand; I never heard a better sermon.  Deacon
it would have washed some of that devil's blue off his face.  Do tell, now,
man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan piety.  At last we rose
meeting?  I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord's day.
more than one third understand me, couch my ideas simply as I would; and,
of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make much profit by reason of
only some of us cherish some queer crotchets noways touching the grand belief;
over the bulwarks, took a good long look at Queequeg.  How long hath he been
papers.  Yea, said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head
picking our teeth with halibut bones.
place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing on that important subject, unless
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly
said Bildad sternly, thou art skylarking with me --explain thyself, thou
sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be converted into the churches.
spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and
than I did.  He looked at me with a sort of condescending concern and
that craft, unless they previously produced their papers.  What do you mean
the victor's compliments to all his friends, just as though these presents
towards the ship, Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff
voice loudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend
was a cannibal, and furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board
were so many Christmas turkeys.  After all, I do not think that my remarks
which you and I, and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg here, and all of us,
young Hittite.  What church dost thee mean?  answer me.  Finding myself thus
young man.  No, said Peleg, and he hasn't been baptized right either, or







     Life was what Captain Ahab and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands
     Look ye; when captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of mine will be
     Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?
     Stop!  cried the stranger.  Ye said true --ye hav'n't seen Old Thunder yet,
     That's true, that's true --yes, both true enough.  But you must jump when he
     You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose, said I, trying to gain a little more
     deck, where we followed him.  There he stood, very quietly overlooking some
--good luck to 'em; and they are all the better off for it.  A soul's a sort
--how to rig jury-masts -- how to get into the nearest port; that was what I
.. < chapter xix 2  THE PROPHET >
.. <p 91 >
.. <p 92 >
Ahab.  But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long
I've heard that he's a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.
I.  He's got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in
Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from the
Think of Death and the Judgment then?  No!  no time to think about Death then.
Ye hav'n't seen him yet, have ye?  No, we hav'n't.  He's sick they say, but
about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy.  Didn't ye
about that, eh?  Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into?  And nothing
ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about that
all right; not before.  What do you know about him?  What did they tell
before long!  laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive sort of laugh.
deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa? -- heard nothing
did; how could ye?  Who knows it?  Not all Nantucket, I guess.  But
earnestness of his manner.  Captain Ahab.  What!  the captain of our ship,
from him, with the fixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the
gives an order.  Step and growl; growl and go --that's the word with Captain
have ye?  Who's Old Thunder?  said I, again riveted with the insane
hear a word about them matters and something more, eh?  No, I don't think ye
his face, and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the
hows'ever, mayhap, ye've heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye,
in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a black handkerchief
investing his neck.  A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over
is getting better, and will be all right again before long.  All right again
massive forefinger at the vessel in question.  He was but shabbily apparelled
mean they know he's only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.
might have been wasted.
object.  Yes, said I, we have just signed the articles.  Anything down
of a fifth wheel to a wagon.  What are you jabbering about, shipmate?  said
other chaps, abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the
rushing waters have been dried up.  Have ye shipped in her?  he repeated.
said quickly.  no matter though, i know many chaps that hav'n't got any,
said, drawing back his whole arm, and then rapidly shoving it straight out
sail-makers who were mending a top-sail in the waist.  Now and then he
somewhere; he's talking about something and somebody we don't know.
stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which otherwise
the Pequod?  Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name.
there about your souls?  About what?  Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any, he
thundering against the side; and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft.
time for an uninterrupted look at him.  Aye, the Pequod --that ship there, he
was thinking of.  Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on
water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the above
word he.  Queequeg, said I, let's go; this fellow has broken loose from
words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, levelled his
ye have heard of that, I dare say.  Oh yes, that every one knows a'most --I
you about him?  Say that!  They didn't tell much of anything about him; only

     Every once and a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den, roaring
.. <p 95 >
.. <p 96 >
.. <p 97 >
Bildad, he carried about with him a long list of the articles needed, and at
But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he be
Charity --Aunt Charity, as everybody called her.  And like a sister of
Peleg and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for
a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad was concerned, and in which she
a very early start.
about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to come on board
absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open sea.
almost, but a spare captain and duplicate ship.  At the period of our arrival
already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up his
and better, and was expected aboard every day; meantime, the two Captains,
and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.  During these days of
another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate's desk, where he kept
at the Island, the heaviest storage of the Pequod had been almost completed;
at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the mast-head,
be found wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to sea.  At one time
before hinted, for some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on
board of divers odds and ends of things, both large and small.  Chief among
charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither,
comfort, and consolation to all on board
comprising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron hoops and staves.  But, as
day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer whaling lance in
down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep ashore till the last.  But it
equipped.  Every one knows what a multitude of things --beds, sauce-pans,
every fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper.
grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers.  And though this also
herself owned a score or two of well-saved dollars.  But it was startling to
his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one's
his ship.  To these questions they would answer, that he was getting better
holds true of merchant vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as
impossibility of replacing them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it
indispensable to the business of housekeeping.  Just so with whaling, which
is no telling how many things to be thought of, before the Pequod was fully
kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if she could help it, nothing should
knives and forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are
must be remembered, that of all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed
necessitates a three-years' housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far from all
next day the ship would certainly sail.  So next morning, Queequeg and I took
nothing, and tried to think nothing.  At last it was given out that some time
numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the
old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit, but withal very
preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the craft, and as often I asked
ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety,
rheumatic back.  Never did any woman better deserve her name, which was
sail for several days.  But no wonder; there was a good deal to be done, and
see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board, as she did the last
seems they always give very long notice in these cases, and the ship did not
she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry;
so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was to be the
spare boats, spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings,
suspicions even from himself.  And much this way it was with me.  I said
the other.  Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all backward.  As for
the voyage.  If I had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen
there
those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad's sister, a lean
to accidents of all kinds, and especially to the destruction and loss of the
very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed this way to
very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends.  Hence, the
with whalemen.  For besides the great length of the whaling voyage, the



     Aft here, ye sons of bachelors, he cried, as the sailors lingered at the
     At length, towards noon, upon the
     he breathed at last, who be ye smokers?  Shipped men, answered I, when
.. < chapter xxii 12  MERRY CHRISTMAS >
.. <p 100 >
.. <p 100 >
.. <p 101 >
Captain Ahab is all ready --just spoke to him --nothing more to be got from
Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.
Captain Ahab, no sign of him was yet to be seen; Only, they said he was in the
He breathed with a sort of muffledness; then seemed troubled in the nose;
I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we heard a
The Captain came aboard last night.  What Captain? --Ahab?  Who but him
alive.  He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not Bildad.
and desiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree, perhaps
and steering her well out to sea.  Indeed, as that was not at all his proper
away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.  How now!  Here upon the
bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged; and several of the
brother-in-law, and a spare bible for the steward -- after all this, the two
business, but the pilot's; and as he was not yet completely recovered --so
cabin.  But then, the idea was,
captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, and turning to the chief
chief mate, that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn
convenient on an excursion; much better than those garden-chairs which are
convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a chief calling his attendant,
custom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans; and to furnish a
does she sail?  Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye?  She sails to-day.
easy!  He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe,
enough; especially as in the merchant service many captains never show
except in port; and on board the Pequod, for thirty years, the order to
fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves.  Besides, it was very
final dismissal of the ship's riggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled
friends, before they quit the ship for good with the pilot.  But there was
going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as if they were to be
house comfortably in that respect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy
in some damp marshy place.  While narrating these things, every time Queequeg
indeed?
joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all appearances in port.  And, as for
main-mast.  Mr. Starbuck, drive 'em aft.  Strike the tent there! --was the
mate, Peleg said: Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right?
need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg, said Bildad, but
next order.  As I hinted before, this whalebone marquee was never pitched
noise on deck.  Halloa!  Starbuck's astir, said the rigger.  He's a lively
not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg was now all
out from the wharf, and after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a
received the tomahawk from me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the
remain over the cabin table, having a farewell merrymaking with their shore
shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board.  Meanwhile
shore, eh?  Well, call all hands, then.  Muster 'em aft here --blast 'em!  No
sleeper's head.  What's that for, Queequeg?  Perry easy, kill-e; oh!  perry
soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger.  The strong
sunrise.  Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes; the riggers
that his presence was by no means necessary in getting the ship under weigh,
themselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but
then revolved over once or twice; then sat up and rubbed his eyes.  Holloa!
they said --therefore, Captain Ahab stayed below.  And all this seemed natural
to.  And so saying he went on deck, and we followed.  It was now clear
vapor now completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him.
very point of starting for the voyage, Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were
whaleboat, with her last gift --a night-cap for Stubb, the second mate, her
which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his



     Some chapters back, one Bulkington was
     When on that shivering winter's night, the Pequod thrust her vindictive bows
--now a word below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chief mate.  But, at
--say your last.  Luck to ye, Starbuck --luck to ye, Mr. Stubb --luck to ye,
.. < chapter xxiii 28  THE LEE SHORE >
.. <p 104 >
.. <p 104 >
.. <p 105 >
Bildad --come, old shipmate, we must go.  Back the main-yard there!  Boat ahoy!
Don't stave the boats needlessly, ye harpooneers; good white cedar plank is
Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortally intolerable truth; that all deep,
Good-bye, good-bye!  Don't keep that cheese too long down in the hold, Mr.
I thought.  If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask, beware of fornication.
Mr. Flask --good-bye, and good luck to ye all --and this day three years I'll
Stand by to come close alongside, now!  Careful, careful! --come, Bildad, boy
Starbuck; it'll spoil.  Be careful with the butter --twenty cents the pound it
all that's kind to our mortalities.  But in that gale, the port, the land, is
and with that, Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the
bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men, murmured old Bildad, almost
boat.  Ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; a
conspire to cast her on the treacherous, slavish shore?  But as in landlessness
dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again for still another
earnest thinking is but the intrepid effort of the soul to keep the open
either.  Mr Starbuck, mind that cooper don't waste the spare staves.  Oh!  the
far-off unseen Eastern Continents; looked towards the land, looked aloft;
fearfulness upon the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a four years'
fights 'gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward; seeks all
for all his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when the
gifts.  Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb; it was a little leaky,
have a hot supper smoking for ye in old Nantucket.  Hurrah and away!  God
heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the lone Atlantic.
his face, as much as to say, Nevertheless, friend Peleg, I can stand it;
incoherently.  I hope ye'll have fine weather now, so that Captain Ahab may
independence of her sea; while the wildest winds of heaven and earth
into the cold malicious waves, who should I see
it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship, that miserably drives along
land, though it but graze the keel, would make her shudder through and
lantern came too near.  And he, too, did not a little run from cabin to deck
last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look about him, -- Captain
looked right and left; looked everywhere and nowhere; and at last,
mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin, convulsively grasped stout Peleg by
men; but don't miss a fair chance either, that's rejecting Heaven's good
peril; her only friend her bitterest foe!  Know ye, now, Bulkington?
plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go.  Be careful in the hunt, ye mates.
raised full three per cent.  within the year.  Don't forget your prayers,
sail-needles are in the green locker!  Don't whale it too much a' Lord's days,
screaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gave three
six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of Bulkington.  Let me only say that
soon be moving among ye --a pleasant sun is all he needs, and ye'll have
spoken of, a tall, new-landed mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn.
standing at her helm but Bulkington!  I looked with sympathetic awe and
tempestuous term.  The land seemed scorching to his feet.  Wonderfullest
that ship's direst jeopardy; she must fly all hospitality; one touch of
the hand, and holding up a lantern, for a moment stood gazing heroically in
the lashed sea's landlessness again; for refuge's sake forlornly rushing into
the leeward land.  The port would fain give succor; the port is pitiful; in
the port is safety, comfort, hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends,
things are ever the unmentionable; deep memories yield no epitaphs; this
through.  With all her might she crowds all sail off shore; in so doing,
was, and mind ye, if-- Come, come, Captain Bildad; stop palavering, --away!
yes, I can.  As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher; but


     blood in their veins?  They have something better than royal blood there.
     famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler?  Who wrote the first
--this day darting the barbed iron from one side of the world to the other.
.. <p 108 >
.. <p 109 >
Australian settlement, the emigrants were several times saved
Cape Horn, no commerce but colonial, scarcely any intercourse but colonial,
Good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is not respectable.
Great, who, with his own royal pen, took down the words from Other, the
Krusenstern.  For in their succorless emptyhandedness, they, in the
Mary Folger, one of the old settlers of Nantucket, and the ancestress to a
Norwegian whale-hunter of those times!  And who pronounced our glowing eulogy
Spain, and the establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts.  That
The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel" afterwards, by marriage,
Your Krusensterns; but I say that scores of anonymous Captains have sailed
a Dutchman, all other ships long shunned those shores as pestiferously
account of our Leviathan?  Who but mighty Job!  And who composed the first
an anchor in their waters.  The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the
and european men-of-war now peacefully ride in once savage harbors, let them
and least known parts of the earth.  She has explored seas and archipelagoes
and unhorse you with a split helmet every time.  The whale has no famous
author, and whaling no famous chronicler, you will say.  The whale no
barbarous; but the whale-ship touched there.  The whale-ship is the true
battled with virgin wonders and terrors that Cooke with all his marines and
business of whaling.  One way and another, it has begotten events so
celebrate as they will the heroes of Exploring Expeditions, your Cookes,
chapters to, these men accounted unworthy of being set down in the ship's
common log.  Ah, the world!  Oh, the world!  Until the whale fishery rounded
connected with it, then am I ready to shiver fifty lances with you there,
enlightened world by the whaleman.  After its first blunder-born discovery by
eventuated the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old
fire salutes to the honor and glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed
for the missionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried the primitive
from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of the whale-ship luckily dropping
great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, was given to the
heathenish sharked waters, and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands,
in Parliament?  Who, but Edmund Burke!  True enough, but then whalemen
in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but the lifetime commonplaces
is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit
issues, that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian mother, who bore
long line of Folgers and harpooneers --all kith and kin to noble Benjamin
missionaries to their first destinations.  If that double-bolted land, Japan,
mother of that now mighty colony.  Moreover, in the infancy of the first
muskets would not willingly have dared.  All that is made such a flourish of
narrative of a whaling-voyage?  Who, but no less a prince than Alfred the
of our heroic Nantucketers.  Often, adventures which Vancouver dedicates three
offspring themselves pregnant from her womb.  It would be a hopeless, endless
out of Nantucket, that were as great, and greater than your Cooke and your
provinces on the Pacific coast.  It was the whaleman who first broke through
remarkable in themselves, and so continuously momentous in their sequential
same truth, and do commercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way
space permitted, it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last
task to catalogue all these things.  Let a handful suffice.  For many
the jealous policy of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if
them the way, and first interpreted between them and the savages.  They may
themselves are poor devils; they have no good blood in their veins.  No good
this, you still declare that whaling has no aesthetically noble associations
upon the whole broad world, taken in one aggregate, than the high and mighty
was carried on between Europe and the long line of the opulent Spanish
which had no chart, where no Cook or Vancouver had ever sailed.  If American
will be due; for already she is on the threshold.  But if, in the face of all
years past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest

     Aye, aye, said Stubb, the second mate, Starbuck, there, is as careful a
.. <p 113 >
Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after sun-down; nor for
ale.  He must have been born in some time of general drought and famine, or
an enraged and mighty man.  But were the coming narrative to reveal, in any
any other whale hunter.  Starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him
arid summers had he seen; those summers had dried up all his physical
at hand upon all mortally practical occasions.  Besides, he thought, perhaps,
at times affected, and in some cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all the
been so killed Starbuck well knew.  What doom was his own father's?  Where, in
bodily blight.  It was merely the condensation of the man.  He was by no
conflict with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinary irrational
could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been extreme.  But it
courage up.  And brave as he might be, it was that sort of bravery chiefly,
courage was not a sentiment; but a thing simply useful to him, and always
do well in all climates.  Looking into his eyes, you seemed to see there the
estimation of the encountered peril, but that an utterly fearless man is a
experiences and remembrances as he had; it was not in nature that these
far more dangerous comrade than a coward.
far-away domestic memories of his young Cape wife and child, tend to bend him
fit; and closely wrapped up in it, and embalmed with inner health and
for long ages to come, and to endure always, as now; for be it Polar snow or
further to those latent influences which, in some honest-hearted men,
have the heart to write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking,
his hardy sobriety and fortitude, there were certain qualities in him which
horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand those more terrific, because more
ignorance.  Outward portents and inward presentiments were his.  And if at
incline him to superstition; but to that sort of superstition, which in some
instance, the complete abasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, scarce might I
living, and not to be killed by them for theirs; and that hundreds of men had
man as you'll find anywhere in this fishery.  But we shall ere long see what
means ill-looking; quite the contrary.  His pure tight skin was an excellent
memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certain
of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly wasted.
organizations seems rather to spring, somehow, from intelligence than from
perilous vicissitudes of the fishery.  I will have no man in my boat, said
persisting in fighting a fish that too much persisted in fighting him.  For,
rest.  Uncommonly conscientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep natural
restrain the gush of dare-devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more
reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life did therefore strongly
spiritual terrors, which sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of
starbuck, who is not afraid of a whale.  by this, he seemed to mean, not only
still more from the original ruggedness of his nature, and open him still
strength, like a revivified Egyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure
suitable circumstances, would break out from its confinement, and burn all his
superfluousness.  But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no more the
superstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this Starbuck which
telling pantomime of action, and not a tame chapter of sounds.  Yet, for all
that in this business of whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits
that the most reliable and useful courage was that which arises from the fair
that word careful precisely means when used by a man like Stubb, or almost
the bottomless deeps, could he find the torn limbs of his brother?  With
things should fail in latently engendering an element in him, which, under
thought Starbuck, I am here in this critical ocean to kill whales for my
through life.  A staid, steadfast man, whose life for the most part was a
times these things bent the welded iron of his soul, much more did his
to expose the fall of valor in the soul.  Men may seem detestable as joint
token of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed the indication of any
torrid sun, like a patent chronometer, his interior vitality was warranted to
upon one of those fast days for which his state is famous.  Only some thirty
visible in some intrepid men, which, while generally abiding firm in the
was not in reasonable nature that a man so organized, and with such terrible
yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly confronted

     Little Flask was one of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last
.. <p 117 >
Arctic whalers; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers
Captain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales,
He kept a whole row of pipes there ready loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy
I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of his
Indian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers of the Air.  Tashtego was Stubb
Leviathans had personally and hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it
Martha's Vineyard, where there still exists the last remnant of a village of
So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels of their
accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer, who in certain conjunctures
as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins.  And since in this famous
ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless miseries of the
battering seas.  Now these three mates --Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, were
cheek bones, and black rounding eyes --for an Indian, Oriental in their
chief mate, had selected for his squire.  But Queequeg is already known.  Next
divided into wrought nails and cut nails; so mankind may be similarly divided.
fish for the fun of it; and a three years' voyage round Cape Horn was only a
fishery, each mate or headsman, like a Gothic Knight of old, is always
generic name of Gay-Headers.  Tashtego's long, lean, sable hair, his high
he could be well likened to the short, square timber known by that name in
headsman each of them belonged.  first of all was queequeg, whom Starbuck, the
his made him a little waggish in the matter of whales; he followed these
hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea; the unerring harpoon of
inserted in it, served to brace the ship against the icy concussions of those
jolly joke that lasted that length of time.  As a carpenter's nails are
largeness, but Antarctic in their glittering expression --all this
likewise, against all mortal tribulations, Stubb's tobacco smoke might have
loading them again to be in readiness anew.  For, when Stubb dressed, instead
long.  They called him King-Post on board of the Pequod; because, in form,
majestic bulk and mystic ways; and so dead to anything like an apprehension
many of her most daring harpooneers.  In the fishery, they usually go by the
momentous men.  They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of
numberless mortals who have died exhaling it; and as in time of the cholera,
of Tisbury, in Martha's Vineyard.  A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very
of any possible danger from encountering them; that in his poor opinion, the
of first putting his legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth.
operated as a sort of disinfecting agent.  The third mate was Flask, a native
or elbowed in the assault; and moreover, as there generally subsists between
peculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air, whether
proud warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New England moose, had
provides him with a fresh lance, when the former one has been badly twisted,
pugnacious concerning whales, who somehow seemed to think that the great
reach of his hand; and, whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in
red men, which has long supplied the neighboring island of Nantucket with
requiring only a little circumvention and some small application of time and
scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main.  But no longer
snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland, Tashtego now
some people go about with a camphorated handkerchief to their mouths; so,
succession, lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter; then
sufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those
superstitions of some of the earlier Puritans, and half believed this wild
tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you would almost have credited the
the Pequod's boats as headsmen.  In that grand order of battle in which
the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires.  To look at the
the two, a close intimacy and friendliness; it is therefore but meet, that in
their long keen whaling spears, they were as a picked trio of lancers; even
these three headsmen were as captains of companies.  Or, being armed with
this place we set down who the Pequod's harpooneers were, and to what
trouble in order to kill and boil.  This ignorant, unconscious fearlessness of
was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerly promontory of
was a sort of point of honor with him, to destroy them whenever encountered.
wondrous whale was but a species of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat,

     one arm elevated, and holding by a shroud; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking
.. <p 120 >
.. <p 121 >
Ahab should be tranquilly laid out --which might hardly come to pass, so he
Nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, the immemorial credulities, popularly
Vineyarder, a Cape man.  Now, it being Christmas when the ship shot from out
about half an inch or so, into the plank.  His bone leg steadied in that hole;
acquainted with, still I ascribed this --and rightly ascribed it --to the
against all warrantry to
allusion was made to it, especially by the mates.  But once Tashtego's
before sailed out of Nantucket, had never ere this laid eye upon wild Ahab.
birth-mark on him from crown to sole.  So powerfully did the whole grim aspect
bone of the sperm whale's jaw.  Aye, he was dismasted off Japan, said the
by what a grey Manxman insinuated, an old sepulchral man, who, having never
calculated to allay these colorless misgivings, and induce confidence and
cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.  Three better, more likely
cherish such emotions.  For though the harpooneers, with the great body of
come to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashioned from the polished
could certainly say.  By some tacit consent, throughout the voyage little or no
deck, and pretty close to the mizen shrouds, there was an auger hole, bored
elemental strife at sea.  Yet, this wild hint seemed inferentially negatived,
few moments I hardly noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness was
fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild Scandinavian vocation in
found, and they were every one of them Americans; a Nantucketer, a
grooves out the bark from top to bottom, ere running off into the soil,
hairs, and continuing right down one side of his tawny scorched face and neck,
her harbor, for a space we had biting Polar weather, though all the time
high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in an unalterable
his quarter-deck.  There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him,
invested this old Manxman with preternatural powers of discernment.  So that
its intolerable weather behind us.  It was one of those less lowering, but
latitude which we sailed, gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all
leaving the tree still greenly alive, but branded.  Whether that mark was born
mast without coming home for it.  he has a quiver of 'em.  I was struck with
melancholy rapidity, that as I mounted to the deck at the call of the forenoon
mould, like Cellini's cast Perseus.  Threading its way out from among his grey
muttered --then, whoever should do that last office for the dead, would find a
no white sailor seriously contradicted him when he said that if ever Captain
nor of the recovery from any.  He looked like a man cut away from the stake,
not till he was full forty years old did Ahab become that way branded, and
of Ahab affect me, and the livid brand which streaked it, that for the first
old Gay-Head Indian once; but like his dismasted craft, he shipped another
or taking away one particle from their compacted aged robustness.  His whole
owing to the barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood.  It had previously
running away from it to the southward; and by every degree and minute of
sea-officers and men, each in his own different way, could not readily be
senior, an old Gay-Head Indian among the crew, superstitiously asserted that
shivers ran over me.  Reality outran apprehension; Captain Ahab stood upon
still grey and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, when with a fair wind
straight, lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper lightning
tame merchant-ship companies which my previous experiences had made me
tearingly darts down it, and without wrenching a single twig, peels and
the crew, were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley set than any of the
the ship was rushing through the water with a vindictive sort of leaping and
the singular posture he maintained.  Upon each side of the Pequod's quarter
then it came upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but in an
three chief officers of the ship, the mates, which was most forcibly
till it disappeared in his clothing, you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly
watch, so soon as I levelled my glance towards the taffrail, foreboding
when the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without consuming them,
which I had so abandonedly embarked.  But it was especially the aspect of the
whitish.  It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in the
with him, or whether it was the scar left by some desperate wound, no one






     Ain't that queer, now?  But there's no telling, it's the old game --Here goes
     It's very queer.  Stop, Stubb; somehow, now, I don't well know whether to go
     No, sir; not yet, said Stubb, emboldened, I will not tamely be called a
     blazes!  he called me ten times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on
     did kick me, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow,
     for a snooze.  Damn me, it's worth a fellow's while to be born into the
--worse nor a toothache.  Well, well; I don't know what it is, but the Lord
.. <p 125 >
I do but less than half like it, sir.  Avast!  gritted Ahab between his set
about the first thing babies do, and that's a sort of queer, too.  Damn me,
and the insertion into it, of the ivory heel.  Ah!  Stubb, thou did'st not
at last. --Down, dog, and kennel!  Starting at the unforeseen concluding
back and strike him, or --what's that? -- down here on my knees and pray for
begone, or I'll clear the world of thee!  As he said this, Ahab advanced upon
but all things are queer, come to think of 'em.  But that's against my
clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at the foot, and the
coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sort of frightful hot, as
crippled way.  Some considerating touch of humanity was in him; for at times
dog, sir.  Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, and
dreams would have been of the crunching teeth of sharks.  But once, the mood
ere long the old man would emerge, griping at the iron banister, to help his
exclamation of the so suddenly scornful old man, Stubb was speechless a
grave; where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one
him with such overbearing terrors in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily
him?  Yes, that was the thought coming up in me; but it would be the first
his wearied mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, such
humorousness, hinted that if Captain Ahab was pleased to walk the planks,
is my twelfth -- So here goes again.  But how's that?  didn't he call me a dog?
keep me from catching it.  He's full of riddles; I wonder what he goes into
know Ahab then.  Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb, said Ahab, that thou wouldst
like these, he usually abstained from patrolling the quarter-deck; because to
moment; then said excitedly, I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir;
muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle.
noise; hinting something indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow,
pace he was measuring the ship from taffrail to mainmast, Stubb, the odd
prevail, habitually, the silent steersman would watch the cabin-scuttle; and
principles.  Think not, is my eleventh commandment; and sleep when you can,
retreated.  I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,
second mate, came up from below, and with a certain unassured, deprecating
some folks ashore call a conscience; it's a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say
somehow.  It flashed like a bleached bone.  What the devil's the matter with
steward, tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man's hammock
take him fore and aft, he's about the queerest old man Stubb ever sailed
teeth, and violently moving away, as if to avoid some passionate temptation.
that for, I should like to know?  Who's made appointments with him in the hold?
the after hold for, every night, as Dough-Boy tells me he suspects; what's
the twenty-four; and he don't sleep then.  Didn't that Dough-Boy, the
then, no one could say nay; but there might be some way of muffling the
there's something on his mind, as sure as there must be something on a deck
though a baked brick had been on it?  A hot old man!  I guess he's got what
time I ever did pray.  It's queer; very queer; and he's queer too; aye,
top of that!  He might as well have kicked me, and done with it.  Maybe he
wad me that fashion?  But go thy ways; I had forgot.  Below to thy nightly
was on him too deep for common regardings; and as with heavy, lumber-like
when it cracks.  He aint in his bed now, either, more than three hours out of
with.  How he flashed at me! --his eyes like powder-pans!  is he mad?  Anyway
world, if only to fall right asleep.  And now that I think of it, that's
would have been the reverberating crack and din of that bony step, that their





     Already we are boldly launched upon the
     Mast-head, there!  Look sharp, all of ye!  There are whales hereabouts!  If
     leg, didn't he?" "Yes, he did," says I. "Well then," says he, "wise Stubb,
     that come to pass; ere the Pequod's weedy hull rolls side by side with the
     your boast, Stubb, that ye were kicked by old Ahab, and made a wise man of.
"Halloa," says I,"what's the matter now, old fellow?" "Look ye here," says
(sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A. D.
.  It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter
.  Unfitness to pursue our
.. < chapter xxxii 6  CETOLOGY >
.. <p 129 >
.. <p 129 >
.. <p 130 >
Flask?  ain't there a small drop
Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down.  No branch of
Remember what I say; be kicked by him; account his kicks honors; and on no
Scoresby, A. D.
Stubb," I thought I might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again.  But I
Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled Cetology, says Captain
a common pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it?  No, you were kicked by a
account kick back; for you can't help yourself, wise Stubb.  Don't you see
and families....  Utter confusion exists among the historians of this animal
barnacled hulls of the leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to a
chimney hag.  seeing he wasn't going to stop saying over his "wise Stubb, wise
classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here essayed.
clout --what do you think, I saw? --why thunder alive, man, his stern was stuck
deep; but soon we shall be lost in its unshored, harborless immensities.  Ere
did," says I --"right here it was." "Very good," says he --"he used his ivory
fashion, to swim off into the air.  I snored; rolled over; and there I was
follow.  It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,
full of marlinspikes, with the points out.  Says I, on second thoughts,"I
great glory to be slapped by a queen, and made garter-knights of; but, be
great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb.  It's an honor; I consider
guess I won't kick you, old fellow." "Wise Stubb," said he,"wise Stubb;" and
had only just lifted my foot for it, when he roared out, "Stop that kicking!"
he;"let's argue the insult.  Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn't he?" "Yes, he
in my hammock!  Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?  I don't know;
incomplete indications but serve to torture us naturalists.  Thus speak of
into the inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups
it an honor.  Listen, wise Stubb.  In old England the greatest lords think it
it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho'.  May be, may be.  But it's made a
kept muttering it all the time, a sort of eating of his own gums like a
knowledge of the cetacea.  A field strewn with thorns.  All these
matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the
more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which are to
never speak to him, whatever he says.  Halloa!  what's that he shouts?  Hark!
of something queer about that, eh?  a white whale--did ye mark that, man?  Look
research in the unfathomable waters.  Impenetrable veil covering our
stern?  Well, the best thing you can do, Flask, is to let that old man alone;
that I would now fain put before you.  Yet is it no easy task.  The
that pyramid?"  With that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer
that that's bloody on his mind.  But, mum; he comes this way.
the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and Lesson, those lights of
what have you to complain of?  Didn't he kick with right good will?  it wasn't
wise man of me, Flask.  D'ye see Ahab standing there, sideways looking over the
ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!  What d'ye think of that now,
ye--there's something special in the wind.  Stand by for it, Flask.  Ahab has
yet of books there are
zoology and anatomy.  Nevertheless, though of real knowledge there be little,






     Charley profanely hinted they were humbug.  Be it known that, waiving all
     It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do.  Philologically considered,
     Razor Back Whale; VI.  the Sulphur Bottom Whale.  BOOK I. ( Folio),
     Whale; III.  the Fin Back Whale; IV.  the Hump-backed Whale; V. the
     druggists as you nowadays buy an ounce of rhubarb.  When, as I opine, in the
     nor, on the other hand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively
(subdivisible into Chapters), and these shall comprehend them all, both small
.. <p 132 >
.. <p 133 >
Above, Linnaeus has given you those items.  But in brief, they are these:
According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary BOOKS
CHAPTER I. ( Sperm Whale). --This whale, among the English of old vaguely
Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of mine in a certain voyage, and they
Greenland Whale which the first syllable of the word literally expresses.  In
However contracted, that definition is the result of expanded meditation.  A
Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as
Now, then, come the grand divisions of the entire whale host.  First:
OCTAVO, the Grampus; of the DUODECIMO, the Porpoise.  FOLIOS.  Among these I
WHALE.  As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale; of the
Whereas, among spouting fish the tail, though it may be similarly shaped,
accidentally obtained from the stranded fish; in those days spermaceti, it
amphibious.  but the last term of the definition is still more cogent, as
and horizontal tailed fish must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology.
and large.  I. The FOLIO WHALE; II.  the OCTAVO WHALE;  III.  the DUODECIMO
argument, I take the good old fashioned ground that the whale is a fish, and
bilocular heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollow ears, penem
call upon holy Jonah to back me.  This fundamental thing settled, the next
conspicuously to label him for all time to come?  To be short, then, a whale
coupled with the first.  Almost any one must have noticed that all the fish
creature hitherto identified with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers;
familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but a vertical, or up-and-down tail.
grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished
he being the only creature from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, is
here include the following chapters: -- I. The Sperm Whale; II.  the Right
inhabitant of the globe; the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the
intrantem feminam mammis lactantem, and finally, ex lege naturae jure
invariably assumes a horizontal position.  By the above definition of what a
is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail.  There you have him.
is the present Cachalot of the French, and the Pottsfich of the Germans, and
it is absurd.  Some centuries ago, when the Sperm whale was almost wholly
known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeter whale, and the Anvil Headed whale,
light, but only as an ointment and medicament.  It was only to be had from the
lungs and warm blood; whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.
meritoque.  I submitted all this to my friends Simeon Macey and Charley
most majestic in aspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce;
obtained.  All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlarged upon.
point is, in what internal respect does the whale differ from other fish.
regarded as alien.  Hence, all the smaller, spouting,
the Macrocephalus of the Long Words.  He is, without doubt, the largest
the idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quickening humor of the
the whales from the waters, he states as follows: On account of their warm
those times, also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce, not being used for
united in the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether insufficient.
unknown in his own proper individuality, and when his oil was only
walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not a fish, because he is
whale is, I do by no means exclude from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea
with the one then known in England as the Greenland or Right Whale.  It was
would seem, was popularly supposed to be derived from a creature identical




     Narwhale; IV., the Thrasher; V., the Killer.  BOOK II. ( Octavo), CHAPTER
     OCTAVOES.  These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among which at
     book i. ( folio), chapter iv. ( hump back). --this whale is often seen on
     not sufficiently distinguish him, since the sperm whale also has a hump,
.. <p 136 >
.. <p 137 >
BOOK I. ( Folio), CHAPTER VI. ( Sulphur Bottom). -- Another retiring
Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions, which the whale, in his
I. ( Grampus). --Though this fish, whose loud sonorous breathing, or rather
Nantucketer.  Thus ends BOOK I. ( Folio), and now begins BOOK II. ( octavo).
Nay; what thing, for example, is there in the Greenland whale's anatomy more
Sulphur Bottom!  I can say nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest
Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings.  He is seldom seen; at
allusions to some kind of whales, yet it is in vain to attempt a clear
always at too great a distance to study his countenance.  He is never chased;
anatomy --there, at least, we shall be able to hit the right classification.
basis.  On this rock every one of the whale-naturalists has split.  But it
blowing, has furnished a proverb to landsmen, is so well known a denizen of
but there again the similitude ceases.  And it is just the same with the other
classification of the Leviathan, founded upon either his baleen, or hump, or
combinations; or, in the case of any one of them detached, such an irregular
distinctions a fiftieth part as available to the systematizer as those
external ones already enumerated.  What then remains?  nothing but to take hold
fin, or teeth; notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very
gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along the
he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which rises in a long
he would run away with rope-walks of line.  Prodigies are told of him.  Adieu,
him the Elephant and Castle whale.  At any rate, the popular name for him does
humpbacked whale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases.  Then,
impossible correctly to classify the Greenland whale.  And if you descend
into harbor.  He has a great pack on him like a peddler; or you might call
into the bowels of the various leviathans, why there you will not find
isolation; as utterly to defy all general methodization formed upon such a
kinds, presents.  How then?  The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are
known but his name.  I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn.  Of a
least I have never seen him except in the remoter southern seas, and then
may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of the whale, in his
mention, that however such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitating
obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of
of the whales bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them
only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone is practicable.  To proceed.
other and more essential particulars.  Thus, the sperm whale and the
parts above mentioned.  In various sorts of whales, they form such irregular
present may be numbered: --I., the Grampus; II., the Black Fish; III., the
recognised him for one.  He is of moderate octavo size, varying from fifteen
retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers.  Though no coward,
sharp ridge.  Let him go.  I know little more of him, nor does anybody else.
striking than his baleen?  Yet we have seen that by his baleen it is
that way.  And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted; and it is the
the deep, yet is he not popularly classed among whales.  But possessing all
the grand distinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists have
the most gamesome and light-hearted of all
the northern American coast.  He has been frequently captured there, and towed
the whales, making more gay foam and white water generally than any other of
them.  BOOK I. ( Folio), CHAPTER V. ( Razor Back). --Of this whale little is
things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of
this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale, each of these has baleen;
though a smaller one.  His oil is not very valuable.  He has baleen.  He is
to twenty-five feet in length, and of corresponding dimensions round the
whales, without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in




     The Huzza Porpoise.  II.  The Algerine Porpoise.  III.  The Mealy-mouthed
     are accounted a lucky omen.  If you yourself can withstand three cheers at
     is famous for his tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes.  He
     them.  I call them thus, because he always swims in hilarious shoals, which
( Duodecimo), CHAPTER I ( Huzza Porpoise). -- This is the common porpoise
( Mealy-mouthed Porpoise).  The largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in
.. <p 140 >
.. <p 141 >
BOOK III. ( Duodecimo).  DUODECIMOES. --These include the smaller whales.  I.
Duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms of my definition of what a
Fourth-of-July crowd.  Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by
His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.  Beyond the DUODECIMO, this
In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise, being of a less
Porpoise.  To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it
Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark.  I have lowered for him many
Sailors put it on their hones.  Porpoise meat is good eating, you know.  It
Sharks included.  BOOK II. ( Octavo), CHAPTER V. ( Thrasher). --This gentleman
a chance, watch him; and you will then see the great Sperm whale himself in
always conveys an idea of hugeness.  But the creatures set down above as
are more than one sort of porpoises, and something must be done to distinguish
beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; the spirit of godly
billows to windward.  They are the lads that always live before the wind.  They
deep sable, yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark in a ship's hull, called
escaped from a felonious visit to a meal-bag.  A most mean and mealy aspect!
feet should be marshalled among WHALES --a word, which, in the popular sense,
figure.  He has no fins on his back (most other porpoises have), he has a
flogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a similar
found almost all over the globe.  The name is of my own bestowal; for there
from the circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio.
gamesomeness is not in ye.  A well-fed, plump Huzza Porpoise will yield you
head, and the whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he had just
his jaws is exceedingly valuable.  It is in request among jewellers and
hitherto been designated, is that of the fishers -- Right-Whale Porpoise,
indistinctness.  For we are all killers, on land and on sea; Bonapartes and
is never hunted.  I never heard what sort of oil he has.  Exception
lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes of a hazel hue.  But his
may never have occurred to you that a porpoise spouts.  Indeed, his spout is
may possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or five
mealy-mouth spoils all.  Though his entire back down to his side fins is of a
might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale, on the ground of its
miniature.  BOOK III. ( Duodecimo), CHAPTER II. ( Algerine Porpoise). -- A
mounts the Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage by
one good gallon of good oil.  But the fine and delicate fluid extracted from
outlaws, even in the lawless seas.  thus ends book II. ( Octavo), and begins
pirate.  Very savage.  He is only found, I think, in the Pacific.  He is
process.  Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the Killer.  Both are
rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat and gentleman-like
separate colors, black above and white below.  The white comprises part of his
so small that it is not very readily discernible.  But the next time you have
somewhat larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same general make.
system does not proceed, inasmuch as the Porpoise is the smallest of the
the Pacific, so far as it is known.  The only English name, by which he has
the bright waist, that line streaks him from stem to stern, with two
the mariner.  Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy
there like a leech, till the mighty brute is worried to death.  The Killer
times, but never yet saw him captured.  BOOK III. ( Duodecimo), CHAPTER III.
upon the broad sea keep tossing themselves to heaven like caps in a
watchmakers.
whale is --i.  e.  a spouting fish, with a horizontal tail.  BOOK III.
whales.  Above, you have all the Leviathans of note.  But there are a rabble
.. < chapter xxxiv 15  THE CABIN-TABLE >
.. <p 144 >
.. <p 145 >
.. <p 145 >
Nor, will the tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness in its
Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far the longest of
a poor old whale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical
after part of the ship.  That is to say, they take their meals in the
all that,
all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils of it, and the
and merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the captain; and
before me in all his Nantucket grimness and shagginess; and in this episode
by no means unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.  Nor,
captain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly communicating with it.
community of interest prevailing among a company, all of whom, high or low,
degree remained unmanifested; through those forms that same sultanism became
depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon their common luck,
encircles an imperial brain;
entrenchments, always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base.  This it
events hereafter to be detailed, he addressed them in unusual terms, whether
family these whalemen may, in some primitive instances, live together; for
featured in the unbodied air!
from the men before the mast, and be in some way distinguished as their
fullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a hint, incidentally so important
grand political maxim of the sea demands, that he should nominally live apart
grandeur not surpassed in any military navy; nay, extorting almost as much
handful of the Divine Inert, than through their undoubted superiority over
he ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience; though he required no
hustings; and leaves the highest honors that this air can give, to those men
in his art, as the one now alluded to.  But Ahab, my Captain, still moves
in the case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown of geographical empire
in which you will see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated
incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship.  For be a man's intellectual
instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency.  But when, as
is, that for ever keeps God's true princes of the Empire from the world's
it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep, and
least given to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the only homage
man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon the quarter-deck; and
merchantmen generally; yet, never mind how much like an old Mesopotamian
of condescension or in terrorem, or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab was
outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not the shabbiest of
perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind those forms and
pilot-cloth.  And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the
professional superior; though always, by them, familiarly regarded as their
relaxed, and in no instance done away.  Indeed, many are the Nantucket ships
sea, is this--the first lives aft, the last forward.  Hence, in whale-ships
so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged in the
social equal.  Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at
subserve.  That certain sultanism of his brain, which had otherwise in a good
superiority what it will, it can never assume the practical, available
supremacy over other men, without the aid of some sort of external arts and
the dead level of the mass.  Such large virtue lurks in these small things
the punctilious externals, at least, of the quarter-deck are seldom materially
them for other and more private ends than they were legitimately intended to
then, the plebeian herds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization.
these things do in some cases tend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in
though there were times when, owing to peculiar circumstances connected with
together with their common vigilance, intrepidity, and hard work; though all
touching Emperors and Kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with
trappings and housings are denied me.  Oh, Ahab!  what shall be grand in thee,
usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself; incidentally making use of
whaling ground) the command of the ship's deck is also his; therefore the
when extreme political superstitions invest them, that in some royal
who become famous more through their infinite inferiority to the choice hidden

     Imperial Electors, so these cabin meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten in
.. <p 148 >
.. <p 149 >
Dough-Boy's memory by snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a
Flask, have for ever departed from my stomach.  I am an officer; but, how I
Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his
against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the deck.  Therefore it was
and Flask is the first man up.  Consider!  For hereby Flask's dinner was badly
and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entire
any mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask's official
appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by
awful silence; and yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation; only he
back, harpoonwise.  And once Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor, assisted
bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse.  And what with the standing spectacle of
banquet at Frankfort, where the German Emperor profoundly dines with the seven
baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox.  And if he were
capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample vengeance, was
care-free license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of those inferior
cloth was cleared, or rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid
complexion; or whether he deemed that, on so long a voyage in such marketless
did flask presume to help himself to butter.  Whether he thought the owners of
dignity of an officer, from that moment he had never known what it was to be
fellows the harpooneers.  While their masters, the mates, seemed afraid of the
filled their bellies like Indian ships all day loading with spices.  Such
great empty wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out
high and mighty cabin.  In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint
himself was dumb.  What a relief it was to choking Stubb, when a rat made a
himself, he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day; for it is
himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it.  Least of all,
his hunger, as keep it immortal in him.  Peace and satisfaction, thought
however it was, Flask, alas!  was a butterless man!  Another thing.  Flask was
in the first degree.  Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never
is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to have but a small appetite, and
its residuary legatees.  They made a sort of temporary servants' hall of the
jammed in point of time.  Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him; and
mates formed what may be called the first table in the Pequod's cabin.  After
more would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world;
nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him.  And had Flask helped
not lively about it, if he did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then
otherwise than hungry, more or less.  For what he ate did not so much relieve
portentous
presumed to help himself, this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny
shuddering sort of little fellow, this bread-faced steward; the progeny of a
sitting silly and dumfoundered before awful Ahab.  Now, Ahab and his three
son, and little boy of this weary family party.  His were the shinbones of
soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast, then Flask must bestir
sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneers chewed their food with
steward.  And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being
such a relish that there was a report to it.  They dined like lords; they
sudden racket in the hold below.  And poor little Flask, he was the youngest
that Flask once admitted in private, that ever since he had arisen to the
the circle preliminary to scalping him.  He was naturally a very nervous,
the last person down at the dinner,
the previous repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great
the saline beef; his would have been the drumsticks.  For Flask to have
the ship denied it to him, on account of its clotting his clear, sunny
their departure, taking place in inverted order to their arrival, the canvas
to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flask through the cabin sky-light,
vanity of glory: there's the insanity of life!  Besides, if it were so that
waters, butter was at a premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern;
when I was before the mast.  There's the fruits of promotion now; there's the
wish I could fist a bit of old-fashioned beef in the forecastle, as I used to
yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear.  If Stubb even, who


     Of modern standers-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set; mere stone,
     shoals and what rocks must be shunned.  It may seem unwarrantable to couple in
(ere the final truck was put to it) as that great stone mast of theirs may be
.. <p 152 >
.. <p 153 >
Admiral Nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in
Blanc, or Louis the Devil.  Great Washington, too, stands high aloft on his
Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers, is an assertion based upon the
Macy, the sole historian of Nantucket, stands accountable.  The worthy Obed
Stylites, the famous Christian hermit of old times, who built him a lofty
There you stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks, striding along the
Trafalgar Square; and ever when most obscured by that London smoke, token is
Vendome, stands with arms folded, some one hundred and fifty feet in the air;
ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of New Zealand, who, upon
any respect the mast-head standers of the land with those of the sea; but
any strange sight.  There is Napoleon; who, upon the top of the column of
are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon discovering
astronomical purposes: a theory singularly supported by the peculiar
at sea.  The three mast-heads are kept manned from sun-rise to sun-set; the
because, in all my researches, I find none prior to them.  For though their
but valiantly facing everything out to the last, literally died at his post.
careless, now, who rules the decks below; whether Louis Philippe, Louis
column marks that point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go.
deep, as if the masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you and between
descrying the game, gave notice to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach.  But
every two hours.  In the serene weather of the tropics it is exceedingly
fire.  But neither great Washington, nor Napoleon, nor Nelson, will answer a
general belief among archaeologists, that the first pyramids were founded for
him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntless stander-of-mast-heads; who
his life on its summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle; in
intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all Asia, or Africa either; yet
iron, and bronze men; who, though well capable of facing out a stiff gale,
lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs ascended by means of
manned to the last; and not till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires
modern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight.  In Saint
more.  Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a
mount to the apex, and sing out for new stars; even as the look-outs of a
nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house.  A few years
of the port, does she altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale
once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes.  There you
pleasant the mast-head; nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful.
prodigious long upliftings of their legs, those old astronomers were wont to
progenitors, the builders of Babel, must doubtless, by their tower, have
regularly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island erected
said to have gone by the board, in the dread gale of God's wrath; therefore,
seamen taking their regular turns (as at the helm), and relieving each other
single hail from below, however madly invoked to befriend by their counsels
stair-like formation of all four sides of those edifices; whereby, with
stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion of
take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the old Egyptians;
tells us, that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were
that in truth it is not so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed
that of a whale-ship
the distracted decks upon which they gaze; however it may be surmised, that
their spirits penetrate through the thick haze of the future, and descry what
this custom has now become obsolete; turn we then to the one proper mast-head,
towering main-mast in Baltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his
very ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate here.  I
was not to be driven from his place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet;
we cannot give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians.  And that the
yet given that a hidden hero is there; for where there is smoke, must be
your legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as ships

     mostly float.  For one, I used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely,
.. <p 156 >
.. <p 157 >
Greenland-men were; yet that disadvantage is greatly counterbalanced by the
I might find there; then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy
I take it very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore that case-bottle,
Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as Captain Sleet and his
and blubber.  Childe Harold not unfrequently perches himself upon the
and so at last mount to my ultimate destination.  Let me make a clean breast
and space; like Cranmer's sprinkled Pantheistic ashes, forming at last a
are so hopelessly lost to all honorable ambition, as that in their secret
are these monitions at all unneeded.  For nowadays, the whale-fishery
at such a thought-engendering altitude, --how could I but lightly hold my
beautiful thing that eludes him; every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some
blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.  Very often do the captains of such
deviations, azimuth compass observations, and approximate errors, he
ejaculates: -- Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll!  Ten thousand
errors resulting from what is called the local attraction of all binnacle
eye open, and sing out every time.  And let me in this place movingly admonish
fisheries any lad with lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable
furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and absent-minded young
greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, and learned Captain; yet
here.  Perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have been shoals of them in
his crow's nest, within easy reach of his hand.  Though, upon the whole, I
in his head.  Beware of such an one, I say; your whales must be seen before
in that bird's nest within three or four perches of the pole.  But if we
is very discreet and scientific here, yet, for all his learned binnacle
knows very well, Captain Sleet, that he was not so much immersed in those
leg over the top-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the watery pastures,
magnets; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in the
many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; I say, that though the Captain
mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship, and in moody phrase
meditativeness; and who offers to ship with the phaedon instead of Bowditch
men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth, and seeking sentiment in tar
mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying the mathematics aloft there
mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came; becomes diffused through time
obligations to observe all whale-ships' standing orders, Keep your weather
ocean at his feet for the visible image of that deep, blue, bottomless soul,
of it here, and frankly admit that I kept but sorry guard.  With the problem
of the universe revolving in me, how could I--being left completely to myself
only people the soul by continually flitting through it.  In this enchanted
pervading mankind and nature; and every strange, half-seen, gliding,
profound magnetic meditations, as to fail being attracted occasionally towards
raised a whale yet.  Whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou art up
resting in the top to have a chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom
seeing what a faithful friend and comforter it must have been, while with
ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, to there having been so
ships take those absent-minded young philosophers to task, upbraiding them
short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve?  They have left
souls they would rather not see whales than otherwise.  But all in vain; those
that well replenished little case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of
the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-like listlessness of vacant,
their opera-glasses at home.  Why, thou monkey, said a harpooneer to one of
these lads, we've been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not
they can be killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten
unconscious reverie is this absent-minded youth by the blending cadence of
undiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that
wakes round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer.  Nor
waves with thoughts, that at last he loses his identity; takes the mystic
widely contrasting serenity of those seductive seas in which we South fishers
with not feeling sufficient interest in the voyage; half-hinting that they
you, ye ship-owners of Nantucket!  Beware of enlisting in your vigilant
young Platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect; they are



     Aye, Starbuck; aye, my hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted
     and tightly, almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus: -- All ye
     chase the white whale?  art not game for Moby Dick?  I am game for his
.. <p 160 >
.. <p 161 >
Captain Ahab?  And he have one, two, tree --oh!  good many iron in him hide,
Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with even more intense interest and
Dick that took off thy leg?  Who told thee that?  cried Ahab; then pausing,
Dick ye have seen --Moby Dick-- Moby Dick!  Captain Ahab, said Starbuck, who,
Nantucket wool after the great annual sheep-shearing; aye, Tashtego, and he
Queequeg, the harpoons lie all twisted and wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his
Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards the main-mast with
a high raised voice exclaiming: Whosoever of ye raises me a white-headed
all the wonder.  Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick--but it was not Moby
and round the horn, and round the norway maelstrom, and round perdition's
as if to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhile lowly
chase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all sides of earth,
crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too, Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes
fan-tails like a split jib in a squall.  Death and devils!  men, it is Moby
flames before I give him up.  And this is what ye have shipped for, men!  to
for the White Whale; a sharp lance for Moby Dick!  God bless ye, he seemed
goes down?  said the Gay-Header deliberately.  And has he a curious spout,
hand me yon top-maul.  While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without
harpooneers and seamen, running closer to the excited old man: A sharp eye
he shouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a heart-stricken
him--him-- faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand round and round as
humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled and inarticulate
imprecations he shouted out: Aye, aye!  and I'll chase him round Good Hope,
jaw they had started as if each was separately touched by some specific
lubber of me for ever and a day!  Then tossing both arms, with measureless
mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a white whale.  Look
me; Moby Dick that brought me to this dead stump I stand on now.  Aye, aye,
measure of grog.  But what's this long face about, Mr. Starbuck; wilt thou not
moose; Aye, aye!  it was that accursed white whale that razeed me; made a
ounce, my boys!  Huzza!  huzza!  cried the seamen, as with swinging
poor pegging
recollection.  Captain Ahab, said Tashtego, that white whale must be the
same that some call Moby Dick.  Moby Dick?  shouted Ahab.  Do ye know the
speaking, was slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket,
splice hands on it, now?  I think ye do look brave.  Aye, aye!  shouted the
spout is a big one, like a whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our
surprise than the rest, and at the mention of the wrinkled brow and crooked
surprise, but at last seemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained
tarpaulins they hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.  It's a
that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of his vitality in him.
the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold with the other, and with
the sun -- it is a sixteen dollar piece, men.  D'ye see it?  Mr. Starbuck,
the top-maul; a white whale.  Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for
though uncorking a bottle -- like him--him-- Corkscrew!  cried Ahab, aye,
till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out.  What say ye, men, will ye
to half sob and half shout.  God bless ye, men.  Steward!  go draw the great
too, Captain, cried Queequeg disjointedly, all twiske-tee betwisk, like
too, said Daggoo, very bushy, even for a parmacetty, and mighty quick,
whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw; whosoever of ye raises me that
white water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out.  All this while Tashtego,
white whale then, Tash?  Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he
white whale, I say, resumed Ahab, as he threw down
white-headed whale, with three holes punctured in his starboard fluke --look
with Stubb and Flask, had thus far been eyeing his superior with increasing
ye!  d'ye see this Spanish ounce of gold? --holding up a broad bright coin to
ye, whosoever of ye raises me that same white whale, he shall have this gold






     Drink and pass!  he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to the nearest
     Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with the detached
     Stab me not with that keen steel!  Cant them; cant them over!  know ye not
     from the pewter.  Now, three to three, ye stand.  Commend the murderous
     with their harpoons in their hands, while his three mates stood at his side
-- here's a hollow!  Men, ye seem the years; so brimming life is gulped and
--long swallows, men; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof.  So, so; it goes round
.. < chapter xxxvii 7  SUNSET >
.. <p 164 >
.. <p 165 >
.. <p 165 >
But those wild eyes met his, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves
Hand it me.  Why, now, this pewter had run brimming again, wer't not thou St.
Perchance ye need it not.  Down lances!  And now, ye mates, I do appoint ye
Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask.  It seemed as though, by some
Stubb and Flask looked sideways from him; the honest eye of Starbuck fell
The irons!  take them; hold them while I fill!  Forthwith, slowly going from
The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained, and mystic aspect.
Vitus' imp --away, thou ague!  Advance, ye mates!  Cross your lances full
among the frantic crew; when, waving his free hand to them, they all
and to cries and maledictions against the white whale, the spirits
before me.  Well
but once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, that had
chalices!  Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble
deathful whaleboat's bow -- Death to Moby Dick!  God hunt us all, if we do not
dispersed; and Ahab retired within his cabin.
done!  Let me touch the axis.  So saying, with extended arm, he grasped the
downright.  In vain!  cried Ahab; but, maybe, 'tis well.  For did ye three
excellently.  It spiralizes in ye; forks out at the serpent-snapping eye.
fiery emotion accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own magnetic life.
gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers.  Disdain the task?  What, when
gone.  Steward, refill!  Attend now, my braves.  I have mustered ye all round
hunt Moby Dick to his death!  The long, barbed steel goblets were lifted;
in some sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before me.  O men,
iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held, barbs up, before him.
league.  Ha!  Starbuck!  but the deed is done!  Yon ratifying sun now waits to
meet the eye of their leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of
nameless, interior volition, he would fain have shocked into them the same
one officer to the other, he brimmed the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters
order ye; ye will it.  Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!
perhaps expired from out me.  Perchance, too, it would have dropped ye dead.
seaman.  The crew alone now drink.  Round with it, round!  Short draughts
shivered.  Once more, and finally, the replenished pewter went the rounds
sit upon it.  Drink, ye harpooneers!  drink and swear, ye men that man the
stand there with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may
suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile, glancing intently from
sweet cardinals!  your own condescension, that shall bend ye to it.  I do not
the bison; but, alas!  only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian.
the goblet end?  Turn up the socket!  So, so; now, ye cup-bearers, advance.
the great Pope washes the feet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer?  Oh, my
the group; he stood for an instant searchingly eyeing every man of his crew.
this capstan; and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers,
three cup-bearers to my three pagan kinsmen there --yon three most honorable
three level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while so doing,
well done; almost drained.  That way it went, this way it comes.  Hand it me
were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss.  Starbuck paled, and turned, and
with their lances, and the rest of the ship's company formed a circle round
you will yet see that-- Ha!  boy, come back?  bad pennies come not sooner.








     ( Foresail
     ( Stubb solus, and
     follow.) Our captain stood upon the deck, A spy-glass in his hand, A
     lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.) Farewell and
     me through!  Peace!  ye revellers, and set the watch!  Oh, life! 'tis in an
     mending a brace.) Ha!  ha!  ha!  ha!  hem!  clear my throat! --I've been
     rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning, and
     scuttle,)  Star--bo--l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!  Eight bells there below!  Tumble
.. < chapter xl 2  MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE HARPOONERS AND SAILORS >
.. < chapter xxxix 2  FIRST NIGHT-WATCH FORE-TOP >
.. <p 168 >
.. <p 169 >
.. <p 170 >
Avast the chorus!  Eight bells there!  d'ye hear, bell-boy?  Strike the bell
Stubb?  Here's a carcase.  I know not all that may be coming, but be it what
adieu to you, Spanish ladies!  Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!  Our
aft!  Methinks it pictures life.  Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on
all predestinated.  I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but to my poor
at home doing now?  Crying its eyes out? --Giving a party to the last arrived
aye, sir, just through with this job --coming.
captain's commanded. -- 1st Nantucket Sailor Oh, boys, don't be sentimental;
come what will, one comfort's always left -- that unfailing comfort is, it's
eight, thou Pip!  thou blackling!  and let me call the watch.  I've the sort
eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt.  Be sure the
filliping to others.  We sing; they sleep --aye, lie down there, like
fine whales, Hand, boys, over hand!  So, be cheery, my lads!  may your hearts
from the Quarter-Deck Eight bells there, forward! 2nd Nantucket Sailor
gay and fleeting As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim, And break on the
harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate's pennant, and so am I--fa, la!
he broods within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water of the
horribles!  I feel funny.  Fa, la!  lirra, skirra!  What's my juicy little pear
hour like this, with soul beat down and held to knowledge, --as wild,
it will, I'll go to it laughing.  Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your
it's bad for the digestion!  Take a tonic, follow me! ( Sings, and all
latent horror in thee!  but 'tis not me!  that horror's out of me!  and with
lips while meeting.  a brave stave that --who calls?  mr.  starbuck?  Aye, aye,
lirra, skirra!  Oh-- We'll drink to-night with hearts as light, To love, as
might readily have prophesied it --for when I clapped my eye upon his skull I
never fail!  While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale!  Mate's Voice
of mouth for that --the hogshead mouth.  So, so, ( thrusts his head down the
old Mogul has fixed him, too.  I twigged it, knew it; had had the gift,
phantom futures!  Stand by me, hold me, bind me, O ye blessed influences!
saw it.  Well, Stubb, wise Stubb --that's my title --well, Stubb, what of it,
sir -- ( Aside) he's my superior, he has his too, if I'm not mistaken. -- Aye,
so?  Because a laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all that's queer; and
somewhere by the sharkish sea.  The white whale is their demigorgon.  Hark!
the gay, embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where
the infernal orgies!  that revelry is forward!  mark the unfaltering silence
the soft feeling of the human in me, yet will I try to fight ye, ye grim,
thinking over it ever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence.  Why
this in our old Mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some as
untutored things are forced to feed --Oh, life! 'tis now that I do feel the
up!  Dutch Sailor Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that.  I mark
viewing of those gallant whales That blew at every strand.  Oh, your tubs in
wake, and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings.  The long howl thrills
your boats, my boys, And by your braces stand, And we'll have one of those


     I, Ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts
     under the windlass) Jollies?  Lord help such jollies!  Crish, crash!  there
( grimly) None.  St.  Jago's Sailor That Spaniard's mad or drunk.  But that
--shirr!  shirr! --but spoken of once!  and only this evening -- it makes me
.. < chapter xli 9  MOBY DICK >
.. <p 173 >
.. <p 174 >
.. <p 175 >
.. <p 175 >
How the three pines shake!  Pines are the hardest sort of tree to live when
Knife thee heartily!  big frame, small spirit!  All A row!  a row!  a row!
Sailor Crack, crack, old ship!  so long as thou crackest, thou holdest!  Well
Spanish Sailor No; Daggoo showing his teeth.  Daggoo ( springing) Swallow
Steady, helmsman!  steady.  This is the sort of weather when brave hearts snap
Tashtego ( with a whiff) A row a'low, and a row aloft --Gods and men --both
We are the lads to hunt him up his whale!  All Aye!  aye!  Old Manx Sailor
Who'd go climbing after chestnuts now?  But there they go, all cursing, and
a row!  Plunge in with ye!  English Sailor Fair play!  Snatch the Spaniard's
afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic with
are just crossing swords, pell-mell they'll go lunging presently.  Danish
ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea.  Our captain has his birth-mark; look
black.  Daggoo What of that?  Who's afraid of black's afraid of me!  I'm
brawlers!  Humph!  Belfast Sailor A row!  arrah a row!  The Virgin be blessed,
can't be, or else in his one case our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat
done!  The mate there holds ye to it stiffly.  He's no more
dread in my soul.  A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; Ahab's
frequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen.  But not all of them knew of his
goes the jib-stay!  Blang-whang!  God!  Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royal
had gone up with the rest; my oath had been welded with theirs; and
hard!  Jimmini, what a squall!  But those chaps there are worse yet --they are
have mercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him from all men that
have no bowels to feel fear!
here I don't.  Fine prospects to 'em; they're on the road to heaven.  Hold on
his orders, mind ye that.  I heard old Ahab tell him he must always kill a
horizon.  In that ring Cain struck Abel.  Sweet work, right work!  No?  Why
jingle all over like my tambourine --that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in
knife!  A ring, a ring!  Old Manx Sailor Ready formed.  There!  the ringed
leap down the crags and drown the villages? --The blast!  the blast!  Up,
long in working. 5th Nantucket Sailor What's that I saw--lightning?  Yes.
murderous monster against whom I and all the others had taken our oaths of
old grudge makes me touchy. ( Advancing.) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the
quarried out of it!  Spanish Sailor ( Aside.) He wants to bully, ah! --the
quenchless feud seemed mine.  With greedy ears I learned the history of that
right into it!  English Sailor Blood!  but that old man's a grand old cove!
rolls swashing 'gainst the side!  Stand by for reefing, hearties!  the winds
shifted to any other soil, and here there's none but the crew's cursed clay.
shirr!  Here have I heard all their chat just now, and the white whale
spine, and meet it! ( Leaps to his feet.) Portuguese Sailor How the sea
squall!  the squall!  jump, my jollies! ( They scatter.) Pip ( shrinking
squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a pistol --fire your ship
storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes! 4th Nantucket Sailor He has
stronger I shouted, and more did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the
the halyards!  in top-gallant sails!  Stand by to reef topsails!  All The
then, God, mad'st thou the ring?  Mate's Voice from the Quarter Deck Hands by
thine, mannikin!  White skin, white liver!  Spanish Sailor ( meeting him)
to hunt him!  Oh, thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness,
unaccompanied, secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostly
undeniable dark side of mankind --devilish dark at that.  No offence.  Daggoo
violence and revenge.  For some time past, though at intervals only, the
yard!  It's worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of the year;
yonder, boys, there's another in the sky --lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch
your white squalls, they.  White squalls?  white whale, shirr!

     are some remarkable documents that may be consulted.  Nevertheless, some there
     as a body.  There are those this day among them, who, though intelligent and
--Olassen and Povelson --declaring the Sperm Whale not only to be a
.. <p 178 >
.. <p 179 >
American flag, who have never hostilely encountered the Sperm Whale, but
Dick; and a still greater number who, chancing only to hear of him distantly
For in his Natural History, the Baron himself affirms that at sight of the
Povelson, the superstitious belief in them is, in some vicissitudes of their
Southern whaling.  Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the great Sperm
Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part, unaccountable to
Sperm Whale, all fish (sharks included) are struck with the most lively
Whale anywhere more feelingly comprehended, than on board of those prows which
against the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death.  And
and portents concerning him, not a few of the fishermen recalled, in reference
and vaguely, without the specific details of any certain calamity, and
been divulged, even to the most erudite research; so the hidden ways of the
captured far north in the Pacific, in whose bodies have been found the barbs
consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also to be so incredibly
contradictory speculations regarding them, especially concerning the mystic
courageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale, would
decline a contest with the Sperm Whale; at any rate, there are plenty of
ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood.  Nor even down to so
from the battle if offered.  One of the wild suggestings referred to, as at
hearken with a childish fire-side interest and awe, to the wild, strange
his pursuers; and from time to time have originated the most curious and
however the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as
inland Strello mountain in Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a
it has been believed by some whalemen, that the nor' west passage, so long a
it, would be inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity.  on this head, there
known to both American and English whale-ships, and as well a thing placed
last coming to be linked with the White Whale in the minds of the
late a time as Cuvier's, were these or almost similar impressions effaced.
legendary times thrown its shadow before it; we find some book naturalists
living experience of living men, the prodigies related in old times of the
modes whereby, after sounding to a great depth, he transports himself with
of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas.  Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in
oftentimes hard to induce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the
one and the same instant of time.  Nor, credulous as such minds must have been,
other leviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lance at
perhaps --either from professional inexperience, or incompetency, or timidity,
perils of this new and daring warfare; such men protesting that although
primitively pursued in the North; seated on their hatches, these men will
probability.  For as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet
problem to man, was never a problem to the whale.  So that here, in the real
some of these instances it has been declared that the interval of time between
stem him.  And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former
such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man.  That to attempt
such vast swiftness to the most widely distant points.  It is a thing well
superstitiously inclined, was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was
tales of
terrors, and often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves
the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days.  Hence, by inference,
these; yet in their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirsty item of
to Moby Dick, the earlier days of the Sperm Whale fishery, when it was
ubiquitous; that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at
upon authoritative record years ago by Scoresby, that some whales have been
vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters.  So that overawed by the rumors
was this conceit altogether without some faint show of superstitious
were, who even in the face of these things were ready to give chase to Moby
whalemen, especially among those whaling nations not sailing under the
whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is restricted to the ignoble monster
without superstitious accompaniments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee
--however grand and wonderful, now quit it; --and take your way, ye nobler,
.. <p 182 >
.. <p 183 >
Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a thousand fold more potency than ever
It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise at the
Ophites of the east reverenced in their statue devil; -- Ahab did not fall down
State-secret come.  Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely:
That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, after the encounter, that the
abhorred white whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it.  All that
ahab and anguish lay stretched together in one hammock, rounding in mid
all my means are sane, my motive and my object mad.  Yet without power to
and gashed soul bled into one another; and so interfusing, made him mad.
and worship it like them; but deliriously transferring its idea to the
animosity; and when he received the stroke that tore him, he probably but
behind; so in that broad madness, not one jot of his great natural intellect
brow the piled entablatures of ages.  Wind ye down there, ye prouder, sadder
cannon upon its own mad mark; so that far from having lost his strength,
captive king; so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on his frozen
collected front, however pale, and issued his calm orders once again; and
collision forced to turn towards home, and for long months of days and weeks,
deepeningly contracted; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman
den into the blessed light and air; even then, when he bore that firm,
dissembling was only subject to his perceptibility, not to his will
essence sits in bearded state; an antique buried beneath antiquities, and
fantastic towers of man's upper earth, his root of grandeur, his whole awful
fast, even there, as he sailed, raving in his hammock.  In a strait-jacket,
feline thing.  When you think it fled, it may have but become transfigured
felt the agonizing bodily laceration, but nothing more.  Yet, when by this
final monomania seized him, seems all but certain from the fact that, at
flows narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge.  But, as in his
had perished.  That before living agent, now became the living instrument.  If
he had sanely brought to bear upon any one reasonable object.  This is much;
he swung to the mad rockings of the gales.  And, when running into more
his hidden self, raved on.  Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most
his hot heart's shell upon it.
his mates thanked God the direful madness was now gone; even then, Ahab, in
intervals during the passage, he was a raving lunatic; and, though unlimbed
into some still subtler form.  Ahab's full lunacy subsided not, but
kill, or change, or shun the fact; he likewise knew that to mankind he did
knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden, passionate, corporal
left behind him with the Cape Horn swells, and he came forth from his dark
moreover intensified by his delirium, that his mates were forced to lace him
most maddens and torments; all that stirs up the lees of things; all truth
narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab's broad madness had been left
now long dissemble; in some sort, did still.  But that thing of his
of a leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked in his Egyptian chest, and was
personified, and made practically assailable in Moby Dick.  He piled upon the
popularize profundities, and all truth is profound.  Winding far down from
precise time of his bodily dismemberment.  Then, in darting at the monster,
race from Adam down; and then, as if his chest had been a mortar, he burst
sadder souls, to those vast Roman halls of Thermes; where far beneath the
souls!  question that proud, sad king!  A family likeness!  aye, he did beget
stormed his general sanity, and carried it, and turned all its concentred
subtle demonisms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy Ahab, were visibly
such a furious trope may stand, his special lunacy
sufferable latitudes, the ship, with mild stun'sails spread, floated across
the tranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's delirium seemed
throned on torsoes!  So with a broken throne, the great gods mock that
whale's white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt by his whole
winter that dreary, howling Patagonian Cape; then it was, that his torn body
with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain; all the
within the very heart of this spiked Hotel de Cluny where we here stand
ye, ye young exiled royalties; and from your grim sire only will the old
yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted.  But vain to



     This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness, when
     and in the Greek mythologies, Great Jove himself made incarnate in a
     there yet lurks an elusive something in the innermost idea of this hue, which
.. <p 186 >
.. <p 187 >
.. <p 188 >
Empire, Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome, having for the imperial color
Most famous in our Western annals and Indian traditions is that of the White
Mountains and the Alleghanies.  At their flaming head he westward trooped it
Steed of the Prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger, large-eyed,
a certain royal pre-eminence in this hue; even the barbaric, grand old kings
a joyful day; and though in other mortal sympathies and symbolizings, this
accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, and honorable, and sublime,
and contributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn by milk-white
and the Holy One that sitteth there white like wool; yet for all these
bear of the poles, and the white shark of the tropics; what but their smooth,
bearing the one figure of a snow-white charger; and the great Austrian
brides, the benignity of age; though among the Red Men of America the giving
cassock; and though among the holy pomps of the Romish faith, white is
climes, whiteness typifies the majesty of Justice in the ermine of the Judge,
clouds of spiritual wonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom
directly from the Latin word for white, all Christian priests derive the name
divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with any object terrible
even made significant of gladness, for among the Romans a white stone marked
fire worshippers, the white forked flame being held the holiest on the altar;
flaky whiteness makes them the transcendent horrors they are?  That ghastly
flashing cascade of his mane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him
four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before the great white throne,
furnished him.  A most imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen,
glories of those primeval times when Adam walked majestic as a god,
great, unflattering laureate, Nature.
has been made the symbol of the divine spotlessness and power; by the Persian
his lofty, overscorning carriage.  He was the elected Xerxes of vast herds of
human race itself, giving the white man ideal mastership over every dusky
in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthest bounds.  Witness the white
like that chosen star which every evening leads on the hosts of light.  The
magniloquent ascriptions of dominion; and the modern kings of Siam unfurling
more loathsome than terrific, to the dumb gloating of their aspect.  So that
not the fierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as the
of Pegu placing the title Lord of the White Elephants above all their other
of one part of their sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath the
of the sacred White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their theology,
of the white belt of wampum was the deepest pledge of honor; though in many
sails in all imaginations?  Not Coleridge first threw that spell; but God's
same hue is made the emblem of many touching, noble things --the innocence of
small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of a thousand monarchs in
snow-white bull; and though to the noble Iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice
specially employed in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord; though in
steeds; though even in the higher mysteries of the most august religions it
strikes more of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in blood.
that spotless, faithful creature being held the purest envoy they could send
the Vision of St.  John, white robes are given to the redeemed, and the
the same imperial hue; and though this pre-eminence in it applies to the
the same snow-white quadruped in the royal standard; and the Hanoverian flag
to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings of their own fidelity; and though
tribe; and though, besides all this, whiteness has been
western world, which to the eyes of the old trappers and hunters revived the
white-shrouded bear or shark.  Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those
whiteness it is which imparts such an abhorrent mildness, even
wild horses, whose pastures in those days were only fenced by the Rocky
with housings more resplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have
--as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming
.. <p 191 >
.. <p 192 >
Bloody?  And those sublimer towers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire,
Europe, does the tall pale man of the Hartz forests, whose changeless
Pizarro, this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new; admits not the
a silent, superstitious dread; the shrouded phantom of the whitened waters is
addressed to the fancy, why, in reading the old fairy tales of Central
altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-toppling earthquakes; nor the
and her suburban avenues of house-walls lying over upon each other, as a
awfulness to another mind almost solely consists in this one phenomenon,
backwoodsman of the West, who with comparative indifference views an
be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes.  Much the same is it with the
break the fixed trance of whiteness.  Not so the sailor, beholding the
chapter about whiteness is but a white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou
cheerful greenness of complete decay; spreads over her broken ramparts the
continual sight of the snow-howdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except,
cope-stones, and crosses all adroop (like canted yards of anchored fleets);
elucidated by the following examples.  First: The mariner, when drawing nigh
especially when exhibited under any form at all approaching to muteness or
faculties; but under precisely similar circumstances, let him be called from
full of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess?  Or why, irrespective of all
his hammock to view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness
horrible to him as a real ghost; in vain the lead assures him he is still off
in some peaceful valley of Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey --why
is it that upon the sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe
is under him again.  Yet where is the mariner who will tell thee, Sir, it was
latitudes and longitudes, does the name of the White Sea exert such a
legerdemain in the powers of frost and air, he, shivering and half
long lacquered mild afternoons on the waves, followed by the gaudiest and yet
monuments and splintered crosses.  But thou sayest, methinks this white-lead
more terrible than all the whooping imps of the Blocksburg?  Nor is it,
much more strongly on the imagination of an untravelled American, than those
not so much the fear of striking hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous
other storied structures, its neighbors --the Byward Tower, or even the
over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sea lulls us with mortal thoughts of
pallor unrestingly glides through the green of the groves --why is this phantom
perhaps, in the mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at
rain; nor the sight of her wide field of leaning spires, wrenched
rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own distortions.  I know that, to
round him, then he feels
scenery of the Antarctic seas; where at times, by some infernal trick of
shipwrecked, instead of rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery,
sleepiest of sunsets?  Or, to choose a wholly unsubstantial instance, purely
soundings; heart and helm they both go down; he never rests till blue water
spectralness
stampedoes of her frantic seas: nor the tearlessness of arid skies that never
such vast altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would
surrenderest to a hypo, Ishmael.  Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled
the bare mention of that name, while the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge is
the coasts of foreign lands, if by night he hear the roar of breakers, starts
the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whiteness is not confessed to be
the prime agent in exaggerating the terror of objects otherwise terrible; nor
the strangest, saddest city thou can'st see.  For Lima has taken the white
to the unimaginative mind is there aught of terror in those appearances whose
to vigilance, and feels just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his
tossed pack of cards; --it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima,
unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twig to
universality.  What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be respectively
veil; and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe.  Old as
views what seems a boundless church-yard grinning upon him with its lean ice
whence, in peculiar moods, comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at
whiteness that so stirred me?  Second: To the native Indian of Peru, the
will not wholly account for it) that makes the White Tower of London tell so








     A goney, he replied.  Goney!  I never had heard that name before;  is it
     But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meant for man, was taken off in
     last the Captain made a postman of it; tying a lettered, leathern tally
     main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing of unspotted whiteness, and
     prolonged gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas.  From my forenoon
     tell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea.  At
     then.  But at last I awoke; and turning, asked a sailor what bird was this.
    !  Hist!  Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?
(eternal rest),  whence Requiem denominating the mass itself, and any
.. < chapter xliii 10  HARK >
.. <p 188n. >
.. <p 194 >
Cholo, the words above.  Hist!  did you hear that noise, Cabaco?  Take the
From hand to hand, the buckets went in the deepest silence, only broken by
Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding, the invoking, and
It was the middle-watch; a fair moonlight; the seamen were standing in a
adoring cherubim!
advancing keel.  It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the
albatross.  So that by no possibility could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had
archangel wings, as if to embrace some holy ark.  Wondrous flutterings and
assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird chiefly
aught to do with those mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw
before the angels, I bowed myself; the white thing was so white, its wings
bucket, will ye, Archy?  what noise d'ye mean?  There it is again --under the
burnish a little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.  I
call him Requin.  I remember the first albatross I ever saw.  It was during a
conceivable that this glorious thing is utterly unknown to men ashore! 
cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist, to the
cordon, whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor, a
damned!  Pass along that return bucket.  There again --there it is! --it sounds
death in this shark, and the mild deadliness of his habits, the French
eyes, methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God.  As Abraham
fill the scuttle-butt.  Standing, for the most part, on the hallowed precincts
fowl.  But how had the mystic thing been caught?  Whisper it not, and I will
frequently seen, but never with such emotions as when I beheld the Antarctic
hatches --don't you hear it --a cough--it sounded like a cough.  Cough be
king's ghost in supernatural distress.  Through its inexpressible, strange
like two or three sleepers turning over, now!  Caramba!  have done,
lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in this, that by a
never!  But some time after, I learned that goney was some seaman's name for
of plumage.  I cannot tell, can only hint, the things that darted through me
of the quarter-deck, they were careful not to speak or rustle their feet.
other funereal music.  Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness of
peculiarity is most vividly hit by the French in the name they bestow upon
round its neck, with the ship's time and place; and then letting it escape.
scuttle-butt near the taffrail.  In this manner, they passed the buckets to
so wide, and in those for ever exiled waters, I had lost the miserable
solecism of terms there are birds called grey albatrosses; and these I have
that bird upon our deck.  For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew
that fish.  The Romish mass for the dead begins with Requiem eternam
the bird to be an albatross.  Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly
the occasional flap of a sail, and the steady hum of the unceasingly
throbbings shook it.  Though bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some
warping memories of traditions and of towns.  Long I gazed at that prodigy
watch below, I ascended to the overclouded deck; and there, dashed upon the
with a hooked, Roman bill sublime.  At intervals, it arched forth its vast

     she would infallibly encounter him there.  So, too, with some other feeding
.. <p 198 >
.. <p 199 >
Nor-Westers, Harmattans, Trades; any wind but the Levanter and Simoom, might
Season-on-the-Line.  No possible endeavor then could enable her commander to
Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast; yet it did not follow, that were the
a meeting.  There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle
all his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned, however flattering
and time himself on his way, as even then not to be wholly without prospect of
be identically the same with those that were found there the preceding
blow Moby Dick into
brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, he would not permit himself to rest
by Ahab, with a view to this very complexion of things.  Because, an interval
cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with which Ahab threw his
consecutive years, Moby Dick had been periodically descried, lingering in
contrary of this has proved true.  In general, the same remark, only within a
example, on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean, or
feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey; but in crossing the
granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems it not but a
grounds, where he had at times revealed himself.  But all these seemed only
hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known separate
his casual stopping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of
his delirious but still methodical scheme.  But not so in the reality,
his object have hitherto been spoken of, allusion has only been made to
hunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year, say, will turn out to
if encountered, should be thought capable of individual recognition from his
in any other waters haunted by his race.  So that Monsoons, Pampas,
is presumed to expand or contract); but never exceeds the visual sweep from
it might be to those hopes; nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so
less wide limit, applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured, aged
mad idea, this; that in the broad boundless ocean, one solitary whale, even
make the great passage southwards, double Cape Horn, and then running down
miscellaneous hunt; if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in
monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance.  But in the
most of the deadly encounters with the white whale had taken place; there the
of three hundred and sixty-five days and nights was before him; an interval
particular grounds, yet in general you cannot conclude that the herds which
pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season,
perhaps.  Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons for
predicted interval in any one sign of the Zodiac.  There it was, too, that
premature hour of the Pequod's sailing had, perhaps, been correctly selected
probabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every possibility the next thing
prolonged abode.  And where Ahab's chances of accomplishing
seas far remote from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his
season; though there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where the
sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial Pacific in time to cruise
sperm whales.  So that though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen, for
technical phrase --the Season-on-the-Line.  For there and then, for several
that path, migrating whales may with great confidence be looked for.  And
the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of the
the devious zig-zag world-circle of the Pequod's circumnavigating wake.  But
the whale-ship's mast-heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magic
there.  Therefore, he must wait for the next ensuing season.  Yet the
those waters for awhile, as the sun, in its annual round, loiters for a
time or place were attained, when all possibilities would become
to a certainty.  That particular set time and place were conjoined in the one
tranquillize his unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest.  Now,
waves were storied with his deeds; there also was that tragic spot where the
whatever way-side, antecedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particular set
which, instead of impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a
widest expanses of water between those grounds he could, by his art, so place
wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or China Seas, or
zone.  The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth and along


     I say three years, but I am pretty sure it was more than that.  Here are
     miasmas, with all the other common perils incident to wandering in the heart
.. <p 201 >
.. <p 202 >
Fishery,
I take it --the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow of itself.  First: I
Was it not so, O Timor Tom!  thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg,
affair.  I care not to perform this part of my task methodically; but shall
and distinctions of a name; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar.
and last, and the last time distinctly recognized a peculiar sort of huge
at distant times and places popularly cognisable.  Why such a whale became
be content to produce the desired impression by separate citations of items,
content to recognise him by merely touching their tarpaulins when he would be
discovered lounging by them on the sea, without seeking to cultivate a more
fishery there hung a terrible prestige of perilousness about such a whale as
flinging of the two harpoons; and I think it may have been something more
foregoing chapter, in its earliest part, is as important a one as will be
found in this volume; but the leading matter of it requires to be still
from the body.  In the instance where three years intervened between the
further and more familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately
good ground to impeach.  secondly: It is well known in the Sperm Whale
harpoon, has effected a complete escape; and, after an interval (in one
have personally known three instances where a whale, after receiving a
however ignorant the world ashore may be of it, that there have been several
ignorance of the entire subject may
induce in some minds, as to the natural verity of the main points of this
instance of three years), has been again struck by the same hand, and slain;
interesting and curious particulars in the habits of sperm whales, the
intimate acquaintance.  Like some poor devils ashore that happen to know an
irascible great man, they make distant unobtrusive salutations to him in the
its flanks all the coasts of Africa; but to no purpose.  This man and this
its travels; no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe, brushing with
memorable historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean has been
mole under the whale's eye, which I had observed there three years previous.
myself, have known three instances similar to this; that is in two of them I
narrative in this book; and, indeed, as indirectly touching one or two very
of many other instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is no
of nearly two years, often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers, poisonous
of unknown regions.  Meanwhile, the whale he had struck must also have been on
oil.  No: the reason was this: that from the fatal experiences of the
party, and penetrated far into the interior, where he travelled for a period
peculiarities as distinguished from other whales; for however peculiar in
peculiarities by killing him, and boiling him down into a peculiarly valuable
practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman; and from these citations,
renown; not only was he famous in life and now is immortal in forecastle
saw the whales struck; and, upon the second attack, saw the two irons with
stories after death, but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges,
street, lest if they pursued the acquaintance further, they might receive a
summary thump for their presumption.  But not only did each of these famous
than that; the man who darted them happening, in the interval, to go in a
that respect any chance whale may be, they soon put an end to his
the respective marks cut in them, afterwards taken from the dead fish.  In the
there did about Rinaldo Rinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen were
three instances, then, which I personally know the truth of; but I have heard
three-year instance, it so fell out that I was in the boat both times, first
thus marked was not altogether and originally owing to his bodily
trading ship on a voyage to Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery
understood, and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound
whale again came together, and the one vanquished the other.  I say I,
whales enjoy great individual celebrity --nay, you may call it an ocean-wide
when the two irons, both marked by the same private cypher, have been taken
who so long did'st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name, whose spout was



     circumstance in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof.
     stand no nonsense.  I will now refer you to Langsdorff's Voyages for a little
     totally
.. <p 205 >
.. <p 206 >
Commodore's craft
Commodore's interview with that whale as providential.  Was not Saul of Tarsus
D'Wolf applied immediately to the pumps to examine whether or not the vessel
Dorchester near Boston.  I have the honor of being a nephew of his.  I have
Islands.  Conversation turning upon whales, the Commodore was pleased to be
Krusenstern's famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of the present
Langsdorff, you must know by the way, was attached to the Russian Admiral
Nantucket.  I have seen Owen Chace, who was chief mate of the Essex at the
Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship, but the
Secondly: The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in the year
brisk gale from the northwest sprang up.  An uncommon large whale, the body
but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep on our fur clothing.  For
catastrophe.
century.  Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter.  By the
commanding the ship in question, is a New Englander, who, after a long life
commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso.  But he was
confidential business with him.  that business consisted in fetching the
conversed with his son; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the
converted from unbelief by a similar fright?  I tell you, the sperm whale will
crew reached the land in their boats.  Being returned home at last, Captain
eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J--- then commanding an American
escaped entirely uninjured.  now, the captain d'wolf here alluded to as
gentlemen present.  He peremptorily denied for example, that any whale could
gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers; for the second
had received any damage from the shock, but we found that very happily it had
hunters I have now and then heard casual allusions to it.  Thirdly: Some
impossible to prevent its striking against him.  We were thus placed in the
in less than ten minutes she settled down and fell over.  Not a surviving
lost off the Azores by a similar onset, but the authentic particulars of
most imminent danger, as this gigantic creature, setting up its back,
never tempted it since.  At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of
of unusual adventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village of
of which was larger than the ship itself, lay almost at the surface of the
particularly questioned him concerning this passage in Langsdorff.  He
plank of her has been seen since.  After the severest exposure, part of the
port to heave down and repair.  I am not superstitious, but I consider the
raised the ship three feet at least out of the water.  The masts reeled, and
saw the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity.  Captain
sceptical touching the amazing strength ascribed to them by the professional
ship, which was in full sail, was almost upon him, so that it was
sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to be dining with a party of
so smite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a
some days we had very little wind; it was not till the nineteenth that a
stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a few moments'
substantiates every word.
such a thwack, that with all his pumps going he made straight for the nearest
the deck, concluding that we had struck upon some rock; instead of this we
the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh.  The weather was very clear and fine,
the sails fell altogether, while we who were below all sprang instantly upon
thimbleful.  Very good; but there is more coming.  Some weeks after, the
thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the next day we were out in
this catastrophe I have never chanced to encounter, though from the whale
time his ship was utterly lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, he has
time of the tragedy; I have read his plain and faithful narrative; I have
water, but was not perceived by any one on board till the moment when the
whaling captains, on board a Nantucket ship in the harbor of Oahu, Sandwich



     Though, consumed with the hot fire of his
     rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearful contemplation, 
     you will clearly perceive that, according to all human reasoning,
--he speaks of the mysterious and mortal attack of the animal.
.. < chapter xlvi 22  SURMISES >
.. <p 204n. >
.. <p 205n. >
.. <p 209 >
.. <p 209 >
.. <p 210 >
Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm whale.  Now,
Emperor, must in all probability have been a sperm whale.
Mediterranean.  I am told, on good authority, that on the Barbary coast, a
Procopius's sea-monster, that for half a century stove the ships of a Roman
Propontis.  In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar
The following are extracts from Chace's narrative: Every fact seemed to
a black night in an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching any
altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage.  Or at least
and such as indicated resentment and fury.  He came directly from the shoal
and the horrid aspect and revenge of the whale, wholly engrossed my
as a vessel of war readily passes through the Dardanelles, hence a sperm
be the hated one he hunted.  But if such an hypothesis be indeed
been isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the
between them, both of which, according to their direction,  were
by no means the largest of that sort, have been found at its surface.  If,
calculated to do us the most injury, by being made ahead, and thereby
calculating mischief, on the part of the whale (many of which impressions I
cannot now recall), induce me to be satisfied that I am correct in my
capture of Moby Dick; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal
combining the speed of the two objects for the shock; to effect which, the
companions, as if fired with revenge for their sufferings.  Again: At all
considering his monomania, to hint that his vindictiveness towards
constitution of
cuttle-fish --lurks at the bottom of that sea, because large creatures, but
events, the whole circumstances taken together, all happening before my own
exact manoeuvres which he made were necessary.  His aspect was most horrible,
exceptionable, there were still additional considerations which, though not
eyes, and producing, at the time, impressions in my mind of decided,
fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashed upon hidden
have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale --squid or
hospitable shore.  The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing; the
if this were otherwise, there were not wanting other motives much more
influential with him.  It would be refining too much, perhaps, even
interests to that one passion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by
investigations have recently proved to me, that in modern times there have
multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would prove to
nature and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways,
operations; he made two several attacks upon the ship, at a short interval
opinion.  Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during
purpose, Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate
reflections, until day again made its appearance.  In another place --p. 45,
seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought; the dismal looking wreck,
so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were by
sperm whales, and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more he
substance called brit is to be found, the aliment of the right whale.  But I
the White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all
then, you properly put these statements together, and reason upon them a bit,
things, a place for his habitual gregarious resort.  But further
warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance which directed his
whale could, by the same route, pass out of the Mediterranean into the
which we had just before entered, and in which we had struck three of his



     It was a cloudy, sultry afternoon;
     Where-away?  On the lee-beam, about two miles off!  a school of them!
     were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle mechanically weaving and
--aye, chance, free will, and necessity --no wise incompatible --all
.. < chapter xlvii 14  THE MAT-MAKER >
.. <p 212 >
.. <p 213 >
.. <p 214 >
Instantly all was commotion.  The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the
Queequeg, while busy at the mat.  As I kept passing and repassing the
air; but from few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived
and fashions both warp and woof; this easy, indifferent sword must be chance
and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene, and such an
at a sound so strange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly, that the
ball of free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up at the clouds
blows!  there!  there!  there!  she blows!  she blows!
broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as if this
completed fabric; this savage's sword, thought I, which thus finally shapes
concluding blow producing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the
cries.  To be sure the same sound was that very moment perhaps being heard all
destiny into these unalterable threads.  Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive,
dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea, only
featuring blow at events.  Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started
filling or woof of marline between the long yarns of the warp, using my own
from Tashtego; and the whales disappeared.  Quick, steward!  cried Ahab.
hand for the shuttle, and as Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid
here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my own
his heavy oaken sword between the threads, and idly looking off upon the
horizon, you would have thought him some prophet or seer beholding the
incantation of revery lurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed
indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof slantingly, or crookedly, or
interblending of other threads with its own.  This warp seemed necessity; and
interweavingly working together.  The straight warp of necessity, not to be
into the lead-colored waters.  Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving
mad Gay-Header, Tashtego.  His body was reaching eagerly forward, his hand
necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus
only tending to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given
over the seas, from hundreds of whalemen's look-outs perched as high in the
over you half suspended in air, so wildly and eagerly peering towards the
prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last
profession.  be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing the
reporting even a porpoise.  This vigilance was not long without reward.
resolved into his own invisible self.  I was the attendant or page of
same undeviating and reliable uniformity.  And thereby whalemen distinguish
shadows of Fate, and by those wild cries announcing their coming.  There she
stretched out like a wand, and at brief sudden intervals he continued his
strongly, or weakly, as the case might be; and by this difference in the
such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian's.  As he stood hovering
swerved from its ultimate course --its every alternating vibration, indeed,
the seamen were lazily lounging about the decks, or vacantly gazing over
this fish from other tribes of his genus.  There go flukes!  was now the cry
threads of the warp subject to but one single, ever returning, unchanging
threads; and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines of
three mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, and not omit
to evince all his well known passionate interest in the general pursuit of his
vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise
voyage; observe all customary usages; and not only that, but force himself
water, carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every yarn: I say so strange a
weaving away at the Fates.  There lay the fixed
what is called a sword-mat, for an additional lashing to our boat.  So still
whence that voice dropped like a wing.  High aloft in the cross-trees was that






     Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. (Strong, strong, boys! )
     That's it --that's it.  Now ye do something; that looks like it, my
     be in a hurry.  Why don't you snap your oars, you rascals?  Bite something,
     he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especially
     in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again: A sad business,
(Pull, my boys!) Sperm, sperm's the play!  This at least is duty; duty and
.. <p 217 >
.. <p 218 >
Besides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself, so loungingly
He would say the most terrific things to his crew, in a tone so strangely
Mr. Stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but never mind, Mr. Stubb,
There's hogsheads of sperm ahead, Mr. Stubb, and that's what ye came for.
Three cheers, men --all hearts alive!  Easy, easy; don't be in a hurry --don't
acted like a charm upon the crew.  Then again, Stubb was one of those odd sort
ain't the White Whale to-day!  Give way!  Now the advent of these outlandish
all for the best.  Let all your crew pull strong, come what will. (Spring, my
all inferiors on their guard in the matter of obeying them.  In obedience to a
and strong.  Give way there, give way!  The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin
and that's what he went into the after hold for, so often, as Dough-Boy long
come to help us --never mind from where --the more the merrier.  Pull, then, do
compounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed so calculated merely as a
deck, this had not unreasonably awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in
eyes out!  Here!  whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle; every
ginger-cakes don't ye pull? --pull and break something!  pull, and start your
hailed the mate.  Mr. Starbuck!  larboard boat there, ahoy!  a word with ye,
hearts-alive; pull, my children; pull, my little ones, drawingly and
his congregation.  Not at all; and therein consisted his chief peculiarity.
in inculcating the religion of rowing.  But you must not suppose from this
inch as he spoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew; his face
it.  Well, well, so be it!  Can't be helped!  All right!  Give way, men!  It
managed his steering-oar, and so broadly gaped --open-mouthed at times --that
marling-spikes!  Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, because
men, spring!)
mother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the blade between his teeth.
of humorists, whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put
profit hand in hand!  Aye, aye, I thought as much, soliloquized Stubb,
pull; never mind the brimstone --devils are good fellows enough.  So, so;
pulling for dear life, and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing.
rapscallions; ye are all asleep.  Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull.  Pull,
set like a flint from Stubb's.  What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!
sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquely across Stubb's bow; and
sir, if ye please!  Halloa!  returned Starbuck, turning round not a single
soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some of whom still showed signs of
specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright passions with
spice to the fun, that no oarsman could hear such queer invocations without
stare at?  Those chaps in yonder boat?  Tut!  They are only five more hands
steel-bits.  Start her --start her, my silver-spoons!  Start her,
strangers at such a critical instant as the lowering of the boats from the
stroke to sweep the stakes!  Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes!
suspected.  They were hidden down there.  The White Whale's at the bottom of
the mere sight of such a yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast,
there you are now; that's the stroke for a thousand pounds; that's the
uneasiness.  Why don't you break your backbones, my boys?  What is it you
when for a minute or so the two boats were pretty near to each other, Stubb
when the boats diverged, as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, I thought so.  Aye,
will ye?  pull, can't ye?  pull, won't ye?  Why in the name of gudgeons and
ye, Cabaco?  They are stowaways, Mr. Flask.  Pull, pull, my fine
you dogs!  So, so, so, then; --softly, softly!  That's it -- that's it!  long




     Sing out and say something, my hearties.  Roar and pull, my thunderbolts!
     and partially beneath a thin layer of water, also, the whales were swimming.
     far off upon the sea; and finally fell to rearing and plunging in the boat's
     whose eyes had been setting to windward like two fixed stars, suddenly
-- He's got fits, that
--merry's the word.  Pull, babes --pull, sucklings -- pull, all.  But what the
.. <p 221 >
.. <p 222 >
Beach me, beach me on their black backs, boys; only do that for me, and I'll
But it bade far to outstrip them; it flew on and on, as a mass of
Flask has.  Fits?  yes, give him fits --that's the very word -- pitch fits
Flask mounted upon gigantic Daggoo was yet more curious; for sustaining
Passion and Vanity stamping the living magnanimous earth, but the earth did
Seen in advance of all the other indications, the puffs of vapor they spouted,
The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as it were, like the air over
and cross-running seas.  Still more strange to see him giddily perched upon
been visible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish white
betrayed no such far-gazing solicitudes.  The whales might have made one of
blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from white rolling billows.
boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubled water and air.
children, boys.  Lay me on --lay me on!  O Lord, Lord!  but I shall go stark,
command, now soft with entreaty.  How different the loud little King-Post.
concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp fixed glance from his eyes
crying out in a quick phrensy of hurry, Down, down all, and give way! --there
darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemed as two visible needles in two
devil are you hurrying about?  Softly, softly, and steadily, my men.  Only
did his crew say anything to him.  Only the silence of the boat was at
dropped like light from his erect attitude to his seat,
from his head, and stamped up and down on it; then picking it up, flirted it
hatband, where he always wore it aslant like a feather.  He loaded it, and
heave did he thereby give to the negro's lordly chest.  So have I seen
himself with a cool, indifferent, easy, unthought of, barbaric majesty, the
his broad back, flaxen-haired flask seemed a snow-flake.  The bearer looked
intensely heated plates of iron.  Beneath this atmospheric waving and curling,
interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the hills.  Pull, pull,
intervals startlingly pierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with
into 'em.  Merrily, merrily, hearts-alive.  Pudding for supper, you know;
little Flask would now and then stamp with impatience; but not one added
match across the rough sand-paper of his hand, when Tashtego, his harpooneer,
mechanically retained between his teeth, at a short distance, followed after
my good boys, said Starbuck, in the lowest possible but intensest
noble negro to every roll of the sea harmoniously rolled his fine form.  On
nobler than the rider.  Though truly vivacious, tumultuous, ostentatious
not alter her tides and her seasons for that.  Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate,
philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with his unlighted short pipe,
pull, and keep pulling; nothing more.  Crack all your backbones, and bite
rammed home the loading with his thumb-end; but hardly had he ignited his
say, and burst all your livers and lungs!  But what it was that inscrutable
seemed their forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders.  All four
sign over to you my Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys; including wife and
solace the languishing interval with his pipe.  He withdrew it from his
staring mad: See!  see that white water!  And so shouting, he pulled his hat
stern like a crazed colt from the prairie.  Look at that chap now,
the loggerhead itself, under such circumstances.  But the sight of little
their regular soundings, not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that
they are!  To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have
unerring binnacle compasses.  He did not say much to his crew, though, nor
water, and thin scattered puffs of vapor hovering over it, and suffusingly
were the case, Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to
your knives in two -- that's all.  Take it easy --why don't ye take it easy, I


     There are certain queer times and occasions
     for a vast practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns,
     the water covering every rib and plank, so that to our downward gazing eyes
.. < chapter xlix 15  THE HYENA >
.. <p 225 >
.. <p 225 >
.. <p 226 >
However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing.  He bolts
I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck, and I was still
a huge, vague form.  Affrighted, we all sprang into the sea as the ship at
all attempts to bale out the boat.  The oars were useless as propellers,
and more than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own.
and worryings, prospects of sudden disaster, peril of life and limb; all
as the standard-bearer of this forlorn hope.  There, then, he sat, holding up
board.  Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut loose from
but was still cruising, if haply it might light upon some token of our
dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely landed on
despairing of ship or boat, we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on.  The
digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints.  And as for small difficulties
down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things
ear.  We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled by
for one instant it tossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip at
friend, does this sort of thing often happen?  Without much emotion, though
he sat, the sign and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope
in his oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; Mr. Stubb,
in the midst of despair.  Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold,
in these jaws of death!  In vain we hailed the other boats; as well roar to
in this strange mixed affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe
joke.  There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
lamp in the lantern; then stretching it on a waif pole, handed it to Queequeg
last loomed into view, bearing right down upon us within a distance of not
mist still spread over the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom
much more than its length.  Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as
ocean.  The wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklers
odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man only in some time
of extreme tribulation; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so
of the boat.  Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his
often happen.  Mr. Stubb, said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up
parted by
performing now the office of life-preservers.  So, cutting the lashing of the
perishing, --an oar or a lance pole.
punches in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker.  That
seems but a part of the general
seen no more till it came up weltering astern.  Again we swam for it, were
shadows of night; no sign of the ship could be seen.  The rising sea forbade
shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water; Queequeg, my fine
soaked through just like me, he gave me to understand that such things did
sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this whole
that imbecile candle in the heart of that almighty forlornness.  There, then,
that storm.  Meanwhile the driving scud, rack, and mist, grew darker with the
that what just before might have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now
the base of a cataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was
the live coals down the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail those boats in
the storm.  The sound came nearer and nearer; the thick mists were dimly
the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the bottom of the
their fish and returned to the ship in good time.  The ship had given us up,
these, and death itself, seem to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly
together; the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us like a
visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as an ostrich of potent
voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.  Queequeg, said
water-proof match keg, after many failures Starbuck contrived to ignite the
white fire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we were burning; immortal


     for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even solicitously
     insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even in these modern
.. <p 229 >
.. <p 230 >
Therefore he had not solicited a boat's crew from them, nor had he in any way
Whence he came in a mannerly world like this, by what sort of unaccountable
about the open sea on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whale-boats, canoes,
an indifferent air concerning Fedallah.  He was such a creature as civilized,
and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each other as
and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers; and the
away; for in a whaler wonders soon wane.  Besides, now and then such
blown-off Japanese junks, and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up
boat.  now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned
cannot sustain
circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the
communities, especially the Oriental isles to the east of the continent --those
cutting the small wooden skewers, which when the
darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how often he stood up
days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth's primal
dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide among the unchanging Asiatic
domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their dreams, and that but
exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimes called,
found bestirring himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands
generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct recollection,
him as a regular headsman in the hunt --above all for Captain Ahab to be
hinted his desires on that head.  Nevertheless he had taken private measures
hunt that mortal monster in person.  But such a supposition did by no means
hunt?  As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly
in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-circular depression in
interest and curiosity at the time.  But almost everybody supposed that this
involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat's crew being assigned to that
it may, certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms soon found their
it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew.  But one
line is running out are pinned over the groove in the bow: when all this was
little of his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes
not create any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.  But be all this as
observed in him, and particularly his solicitude in having an extra coat of
of his own touching all that matter.  Until Cabaco's published discovery, the
of the chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his
orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to
particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the
place among the crew, though still as it were somehow distinct from them,
pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the anxiety he evinced in
real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and to
sailors had little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little
sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make it better withstand the
ships themselves often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing
so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven knows, but
straightened it a little there; all these things, I say, had awakened much
such generous conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod.
supplied with five extra men, as that same boat's crew, he well knew that
that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril; under these
the cleat, and with the carpenter's chisel gouged out a little here and
the horizontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the knee against in
the side and step down into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would
the whaleboats for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then
thought not.  Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think
tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay,
ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed his intention to
unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks
while out of port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting
yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery to the last.



     sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition, as if it were
     tightly clenched hand.  Though the body was erect, the head was thrown back
     wax, day after day tore on through all the swift madness and gladness of the
.. <p 233 >
.. <p 234 >
Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before
So, with his ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand
Starbuck forget the old man's aspect, when one night going down into the cabin
These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrous
addressed his mates.  In tempestuous times like these, after everything above
against the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into a sort of
all space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of
and aloft has been secured, nothing more can be done but passively to await
and coat.  On the table beside him lay unrolled one of those charts of tides
and currents which have previously been spoken of.  His lantern swung from his
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that
barometer stood, he saw him with closed eyes sitting straight in his
bowline secured to the rail, in which he swung as in a loosened belt.  Few or
bred.  Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye?  Rather Cape Tormentoto, as called
dangerous deck, manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever
deemed our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to
demanding repose he would not seek that repose in his hammock.  Never could
demoniac waves.  By night the same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of
desolation, and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves.  And
everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat that black air without any
feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet
firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to
floor-screwed chair; the rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from which
he had some time before emerged, still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat
heaved and heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast
his very eyelashes together.  Meantime, the crew driven from the forward
horizon.  But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days
life before our urn-like prow.  But, at last, when turning to the eastward,
morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and spite of
mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering it had
no words were spoken; and the silent ship, as if manned by painted sailors in
of yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended
our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they
part of the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows,
potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneath all
round upon us, and rend us at last in the remotest and most savage seas.
silver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks; then all this desolate
so that the closed eyes were pointed towards the needle of the tell-tale that
stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist; and the better to guard
the Cape winds began howling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long,
the blast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of
the issue of the gale.  Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists.
the ocean prevailed; still in silence the men swung in the bowlines; still
though assuming for the time the almost continual command of the drenched and
tides were a conscience; and the great
to mark how the
transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on
treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that the monster might turn
troubled seas that are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to
us, we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty beings
us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens.  And every
vacuity of life went away, but gave place to sights more dismal than before.
windward, while an occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal
wordless ahab stood up to the blast.  Even when wearied nature seemed
would at times be descried.  During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab,



     Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea, two whaling vessels descrying each
     The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on
     ship she now meets.  Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have
.. < chapter liii 17  THE GAM >
.. <p 234n. >
.. <p 236 >
.. <p 237 >
.. <p 238 >
And in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the
But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were not something said
But where this superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it
King's Mills; how much more natural, I say, that under such circumstances
Nantucketer, with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant.
Plain in England; if
The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to the
Though, to be sure, from the small number of English whalers, such meetings
a negative answer to the question he put.  For, as it eventually turned out,
a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files.
about.  For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters
an agreeable chat.  For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of
board of the whaler we had spoken was this: the wind and sea betokened
both parties speak one language, as is the case with Americans and English.
but himself.  Besides, the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of
captains, officers, and not a few of the men are personally known to each
casually encountering each other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for
common pursuit and mutually shared privations and perils.  Nor would
compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself of the
course of the ship.
crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the equally desolate Salisbury
cruising-ground itself, even though they are equally long absent from home.
destined, a thing of the utmost importance to her.  And in degree, all this
difference of country make any very essential difference; that is, so long as
do not very often occur, and when they do occur there is too apt to be a
except he could contribute some of that information he so absorbingly sought.
for one of them may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and
foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.  If two strangers
harmless little foible in the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer
he cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with any stranger captain,
here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting each other in
latest whaling intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be
matter of course, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose
metropolitan superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean
moment to interchange the news; and, perhaps, sitting down for a while and
more friendly and sociable contact.  And especially would this seem to be a
more whales than all the English, collectively, in ten years.  But this is a
now far remote vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of the
occasions --if so it had been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained
on board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date
other at the ends of the earth --off lone Fanning's Island, or the far away
other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things to talk
perhaps, have boarded her --judging by his subsequent conduct on similar
reserved, and your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody
resting in concert: then, how much more natural that upon the illimitable Pine
sailors, but likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a
sort of shyness between them; for your Englishman is rather
storms.  But even had this not been the case, he would not after all,
the life of them, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation; and stopping for a
these ships should not only interchange hails, but come into still closer,
whelmed.
will hold true concerning whaling vessels crossing each other's track on the
would be hard to say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill




     ( As told at the Golden Inn.)
     The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is much
     This latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming
     friends, one saint's eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the
.. < chapter liv 26  THE TOWN-HO'S STORY >
.. <p 240 >
.. <p 241 >
.. <p 242 >
Golden Inn.  Of those fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian,
Goney that another
Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in
Whaler of Nantucket, was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days'
as publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now
authenticated ones too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly
buoyant self-command, he generally carries his hands in his trowsers'
captain is all alive to the importance of sustaining his dignity by
catching hold of anything with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire,
critical moment or two, in a sudden squall say --to seize hold of the nearest
daily usage, it was observed that she made more water in her hold than
delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this matter, that they kept
gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm
heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho's story, which seemed obscurely
his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his knees in front.  He is
homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho, was encountered.  She was manned almost
in that way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet more
main-mast.  Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story
maintaining his legs.  nor is this any very easy matter; for in his rear is
nothing without corresponding breadth.  Merely make a spread angle of two
oarsman's hair, and hold on there like grim death.
occasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time.  Some two years
of Moby Dick.  To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly
of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of foundation is
pockets; but perhaps being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them
poles, and you cannot stand them up.  Then, again, it would never do in plain
prior to my first learning the events which I am about rehearsing to you,
proceed to put on lasting record.  For my humor's sake, I shall preserve the
property of three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it
reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates.  For that secret part of the
sail westward from the eaves of this good Golden Inn.  She was somewhere to
seems, communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secresy, but
sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden, violent pitch
sight of the world's riveted eyes, it would never do, I say, for this
story was unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself.  It was the private
straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by
style in which I once narrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish
the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by such a strange
the following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it
the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now and then in the small of
the northward of the Line.  One morning upon handling the pumps, according to
the secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod's
there for ballast.  Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well
those so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men.
thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only expand himself
to involve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of
travellers than in any other part.  It was not very long after speaking the
visible world resting on him from the sides of the two ships, this standing
were on the closer terms with me; and hence the interluding questions they
what may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never
wholly by Polynesians.  In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news


     Radney, pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk.  "Thunder away at it!"
 "Aye, aye, my merry lads, it's a lively leak this; hold a cannikin, one of
.. <p 245 >
.. <p 246 >
Rad were here now, I'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em.  They're
Steelkilt --but, gentlemen, you shall hear.  It was not more than a day or two
Town-Ho's leak seemed again increasing, but only so as to require an hour or
about the safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only on
accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded them.  It is
account of his being a part owner in her.  So when they were working that
affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay banterings.
and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it altogether
anxious.  Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was
as malicious.  He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it.  Espying the
at the furthest after pointing her prow for her island haven, that the
bubbling from
conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness; and if he have a chance
conveniently imagine, gentlemen.  Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude
conventional world of ours --watery or otherwise; that when a person placed
cutting and slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose.  If old
evening at the pumps, there was on this head no small gamesomeness slily
events Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a
events, he had proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and
father.  But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn,
file-fish, and what not; and the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work
flowing golden beard like the tasseled housings of your last viceroy's
for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it lie along a tolerably
found gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by
going on among them, as they stood with their feet continually overflowed by
he will pull down and pulverize that subaltern's tower, and make a little
heap of dust of it.  Be this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all
in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his
invested in looking-glasses.  I wonder if he'd give a poor devil like me the
lee scupper-holes.  Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this
little inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own
mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest, the Lakeman
model of his nose." "Damn your eyes!  what's that pump stopping for?" roared
more at the pumps every day.  You must know that in a settled and civilized
ocean like our Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pumping
of the hull and tow it home.  The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began
officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect, the
on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom.  Nor in the solitary
only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of those waters,
person as any fearless, unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can
playing the devil with his estate, I can tell him.  But he's a simple old
probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again remember it,
several of her company; especially by radney the mate.  He commanded the
snorting charger; and a brain, and a heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen,
some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a little
soul, -- Rad, and a beauty too.  Boys, they say the rest of his property is
superior in general pride of manhood, straightway against that man he
the breeze.  Now this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as
the job; he's come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and
the pumps ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the
the rippling clear water; clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen --that
their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should the
treated, this Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile.  At all
unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full chorus even
upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way expanded to
what, men, old Rad's investment must go for it!  he had best cut away his part
which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had he been born son to Charlemagne's
ye, and let's have a taste.  By the Lord, it's worth bottling!  I tell ye




     For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth of
     hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary land, we know but
     told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (Steelkilt)
     you pour out again."  Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the
 "Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's Inquisition wanes in Lima,"
"We have seen many whale-ships in our harbors, but never heard of your
-- Corrupt as Lima.  It but bears out your saying, too; churches more
.. <p 248 >
.. <p 249 >
Canaller would make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely
Canallers are; for such information may throw side-light upon my story."
Canallers.  Pardon: who and what are they?" "Canallers, Don, are the boatmen
Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck.  But ashore, all
Pedro, looking downwards into the crowded plazza, with humorous concern.
So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the blessed evangelist,
St.  Mark! --St.  Dominic, purge it!  Your cup!  Thanks: here I refill;  now,
belonging to our grand Erie Canal.  You must have heard of it." "Nay, Senor;
blood like a whale.  Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of
by the gods.  Immediately the hammer touched the cheek; the next instant the
chicha's very fine; and ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our
continual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life.  There's your
contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of
do not bow and look surprised; you know the proverb all along this coast
fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room and bar-room; through
flowery Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked
heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of
his own canal, I have received good turns from one of these Canallers; I
insufferable maledictions.  Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch;
laughed Don Sebastian.  "Proceed, Senor." "A moment!  Pardon!" cried another
little of your vigorous North." "Aye?  Well then, Don, refill my cup.  Your
lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he fell on the hatch spouting
metropolitan freebooters
most abound in holiest vicinities.  "Is that a friar passing?" said Don
next door to you; under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronizing lee
of churches.  For by some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your
of the company.  "In the name of all us Limeese, I but desire to express to
one.  In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is, is
plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open--and Corrupt as Lima.
prime redeeming qualities of your man of violence, that at times he has as
snow-white chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one
sports; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features.  A
stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance,
steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back,
stiff an arm to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy
substituting present Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison.  Oh!
swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities.  Once a vagabond on
terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through which he floats; his
thank him heartily; would fain be not ungrateful; but it is often one of the
that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen,
the backstays leading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing
the holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers;
the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most thriving
their mast-heads.  They were both Canallers.  "Canallers!" cried Don Pedro,
this effeminacy is dashed.  The brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly
through sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide
true Ashantee, gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where you ever find them,
villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, cultivated
wicked is he.  Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed,
would murder him.  But, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughter
you, sir sailor, that we have by no means overlooked your delicacy in not




     But to this their leader as fiercely objected, reserving that priority for
     fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained them to surrender at
     run a muck from the bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of
     they swore they were ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for
 "Oh!  certainly," said the Captain and the key clicked.  It was at this
.. <p 252 >
.. <p 253 >
Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to burst out of their
Captain with a heartless jeer.  "Shut us up again, will ye!" cried Steelkilt.
The fetid closeness of the air, and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some
after it; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it, the Captain
and aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at which
and betake himself where he belonged.  On the fifth morning three others of
anything in short but a surrender.  And what was more, they each insisted
called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock, belonging to the
clanking at intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the
companion-way.  Then opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered
den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.  As the Lakeman's bare
desperation possible, seize the ship.  For himself, he would do this, he said,
discretion.  Emboldened by this, the Captain reiterated his demand to the
four men burst up from the forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to.
head was just level with the planks,
himself; particularly as his two comrades would not yield, the one to the
hole at the next summoning of the garrison; and armed with their keen
in order to be the first of the three, though the last of the ten, to
last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as
last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through
leader, each in his own separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem,
length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their dark
might merit.  But when Steelkilt made known his determination still to lead
mincing knives (long, crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each end)
mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when their leader fell
neutral.  All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward
number --leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had remained
of seven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had
other, in the matter; and both of them could not be first, for the ladder
point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection
repeated; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a
rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop his babbling
returned to the quarter-deck.  Twice every day for three days this was
scuffling was heard, as the customary summons was delivered; and suddenly
ship.  at sunrise the captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,
slide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly
something down the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them --ten in
still remained at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking and
summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused.  Water was
surrender; and thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct
that den.  but the scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two;
the Captain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the
the bowels of despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two
the bulkhead below.  But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who
the mutineers bolted up into the air from the desperate arms below that sought
them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle chemistry of villany,
then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed
these miscreants must come out.  Upon hearing the frantic project of their
to restrain them.  Only three were left.  "Better turn to, now?" said the
upon being the first man on deck, when the time to make the rush should come.
upon the same piece of treachery, namely: to be foremost in breaking out,
whether they joined him or not.  That was the last night he should spend in
would but admit one man at a time.  And here, gentlemen, the foul play of



     During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the
     and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass, that lit up by
     upon resuming the head of his watch at night.  Upon this, and one or two
 "Like a lanyard for your bag; but it's an odd one, seems to me." "Yes,
"but I think it will answer.  Shipmate, I haven't enough twine, --have you
--neither twine nor lanyard were seen again; but the next night an iron ball,
.. <p 256 >
.. <p 257 >
Dons --nay, nay!  I cannot rehearse that now.  Let me get more into the air,
Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his hands into its own the
I proceed. --Now, gentlemen, so suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within
Rad;" and he rose to go aft.  "You don't mean to go a begging to him!" said
Sirs." "The chicha!  the chicha!" cried Don Pedro; "our vigorous friend
Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his next trick at the helm
a phrensy.  "The White Whale --the White Whale!" was the cry from captain,
a sailor.  "Why not?  Do you think he won't do me a turn, when it's to help
a story." "How?  how!" cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.  "Nay, Dons,
a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing water in the main-chains, all at once
after, his trick at the silent helm --nigh to the man who was apt to doze over
and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don; --but that would be too long
any?"  But there was none in the forecastle.  "Then I must get some from old
as he was tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow.  Twenty-four hours
as ready to change his berth for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to
attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed.  There was a considerable
boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship's side.  In this
braiding something very carefully in his watches below.  "What are you making
bulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the
but do whales have christenings?  Whom call you Moby Dick?" "A very white,
closely netted, partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman's monkey jacket,
come; and in
damning thing he would have done.  It was just between daybreak and sunrise of
excitement of the moment, the Teneriffe man had instinctively and
fifty yards of the ship --forgetful of the compact among the crew --in the
gag in death the vital jaw of the whale.  But though the Lakeman had induced
himself in the end, shipmate?" and going to the mate, he looked at him
infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his doom, after the
involuntarily lifted his voice for the monster, though for some little time
looks faint; --fill up his empty glass!"  No need, gentlemen; one moment, and
mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumors, were all anxious
of his heart.  He was in Radney the chief mate's watch; and as if the
other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his revenge.
own counsel (at least till all was over) concerning his own proper and
past it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads.  All was now
private revenge upon the man who had stung him in the ventricles
quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock.  It was given him
rather oddish," said the Lakeman, holding it at arm's length before him;
revenge he had, and without being the avenger.  For by a mysterious fatality,
saved the would-be murderer from the bloody deed he had planned.  Yet complete
scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel of the captain,
shouted out, "There she rolls!  there she rolls!"  Jesu, what a whale!  It
stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.  But, gentlemen, a fool
the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and
the grave always ready dug to the seaman's hand --that fatal hour was then to
the morning of the second day, when they were washing down the decks, that
the seamen to adopt this sort of passiveness in their conduct, he kept his
there?" said a shipmate.  "What do you think?  what does it look like?"
to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew eyed askance,
vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea.
was Moby Dick.  "Moby Dick!" cried Don Sebastian; "St.  Dominic!  Sir sailor,
which he had been betrayed.  At his leisure, he employed the interval in
would come round at two o'clock, in the morning of the third day from that in


     I shall ere long
     this story is in substance really true?  It is so passing wonderful!  Did you
 "Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in Don Sebastian's
 "So help me Heaven, and on my honor the story I have told ye, gentlemen, is
"but I know a worthy priest near by, who will quickly procure one for me.  I
.. < chapter lv 7  OF THE MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES >
.. <p 241n. >
.. <p 260 >
.. <p 261 >
.. <p 261 >
Auto-da-Fes in Lima now," said one of the company to another: "I fear our
Don Sebastian; but may I also beg that you will be particular in procuring
Don." "Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions,
Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn, gentlemen?" "Nay," said Don Sebastian;
Steelkilt since the death of Radney."
Tahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea.  Chartering a small native
The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head, still
There, luck befriended him; two ships were about to sail for France, and
absolute body the whale is moored alongside the whale-ship so that he can be
advert to those curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to the
again resumed his cruisings.  Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know;
again, and in due time arrived at Tahiti, his own place of destination.
ancient extant portrait anyways purporting to be the whale's, is to be found
arrived, and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilized
be found among the oldest Hindoo, Egyptian, and Grecian sculptures.  For ever
be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?" "Though there are no
beached, and drawn up to the roots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail
but in many scientific presentations of him.  Now, by all odds, the most
but upon the island of Nantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea
coins, the dolphin was drawn in scales of chain-armor like Saladin's, and a
fairly stepped upon there.  It may be worth while, therefore, previously to
get it from an unquestionable source?  Bear with me if I seem to press."
go for it; but are you well advised?  this may grow too serious." "Will you
helmeted head like St.  George's; ever since then has something of the same
in substance and its great items, true.  I know it to be true; it happened on
in the famous cavern-pagoda of Elephanta, in India.  The Brahmins maintain
of men which the sailor headed.  They embarked; and so for ever got the start
of the whale as he actually appears to the eye of the whaleman when in his own
of their former captain, had he been at all minded to work them legal
paint to you as well as one can without canvas, something like the true form
present day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman.  It is time to
retribution.  Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat
sailor friend runs risk of the archiepiscopacy.  Let us withdraw more out of
schooner, he returned with them to his vessel; and finding all right there,
sea, he swam back to his comrades.  Watching the boat till it was fairly
set the world right in this matter, by proving such pictures of the whale all
since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marble panellings of
solemn figure.  "Let me remove my hat.  Now, venerable priest, further into
sort of license prevailed, not only in most popular pictures of the whale,
suit," cried the company, with exceeding interest.  "Is there a copy of the
temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields, medallions, cups, and
that destroyed him.  "Are you through?" said Don Sebastian, quietly.  "I am,
that in the almost endless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the
the Evangelists," said Don Sebastian, gravely, returning with a tall and
the largest sized Evangelists you can." "This is the priest, he brings you
the light, and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it."
the moonlight.  I see no need for this." "Excuse me for running after you,
this ball; I trod the ship; I knew the crew; I have seen and talked with
used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.
were providentially in want of precisely that number
which refuses to give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale
wrong.  It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions will




     and, as for the narwhale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in
     intelligent public of schoolboys.  Then, again, in
     with broken back, would correctly represent the noble animal itself in all
(that is to say, the Right whale), even Scoresby, a long experienced man as
, Bernard Germain,
, he
, there are plates of an alleged whale and a narwhale.  I do not wish
.. <p 264 >
.. <p 265 >
Consider!  Most of the scientific drawings have been taken from the
Count de Lacepede,
Frederick Cuvier's Sperm Whale is not a Sperm Whale, but a squash.  Of course,
Richard III.  whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage; breakfasting on
a great naturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book, wherein are
any leviathan's articulated bones.  In fact, as the great Hunter says, the
authentic abortions; that is, from a Chinese drawing.  And what sort of
candelabra in the library of one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea
contour between a young sucking whale and a full-grown Platonian Leviathan;
curious things about this Leviathan, that his skeleton gives very little idea
deck, such is then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him,
deformities floundering in seas of blood and blue paint.  but these manifold
element it is a thing eternally impossible for mortal man to hoist
fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the stranded whale, accurate hints
full-lengths, the living Leviathan has never yet fairly floated himself for
he never had the benefit of a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but
him bodily into the air, so as to preserve all his mighty swells and
him is out of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship; and out of that
his portrait.  The living whale, in his full majesty and significance, is
inform us.  As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging over
it.  This peculiarity is strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part of
its undashed pride of hull and spars.  Though elephants have stood for their
lively lads with the pencil those Chinese are, many queer cups and saucers
may be derived touching his true form.  Not at all.  For it is one of the more
mere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the fully invested and
mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very surprising after all.
not only incorrect, but the picture of the Mysticetus or Greenland whale
of a burly-browed utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy's other leading
of his general shape.  Though Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for
only to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters; and afloat the vast bulk of
padded animal as the insect does to the chrysalis that so roundingly envelopes
personal characteristics; yet nothing of this kind could be inferred from
picture of the Sperm Whale.  Before showing that picture to any Nantucketer,
popular work Goldsmith's Animated Nature.  In the abridged London edition of
published a Natural History of Whales, in which he gives what he calls a
scientific predecessor in the same field, Desmarest, got one of his
several pictures of the different species of the Leviathan.  All these are
stranded fish; and these are about as correct as a drawing of a wrecked ship,
that his precise expression the devil himself could not catch.  But it may be
the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business was reserved for
the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the famous Baron.  In
the shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them?  They are generally
this nineteenth century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuine upon any
three or four sailor tarts, that is whaleboats full of mariners: their
to seem inelegant, but this unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow;
touching that species, declares not to have its counterpart in nature.  But
undulations.  And, not to speak of the highly presumable difference of
whence he derived that picture, who can tell?  Perhaps he got it as his
yet, even in the case of one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's
you had best provide for your summary retreat from Nantucket.  In a word,
young and tender, free from the same heinousness of mistake.  Look at that
 (in the act of cutting-in) hove over to the monster as if to a quay; and a
.. <p 268 >
.. <p 269 >
Go and gaze upon all the paintings in Europe, and where will you find such a
Northern Lights, and the successive armed kings and Emperors dash by, like a
Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not.  But my life for it he was
a stiff full length of the Greenland whale, and three or four delicate
abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there must be a brave
accounts.  It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific; a French
adapted to our present purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other
all raging commotion; but behind, in admirable artistic contrast, is the
are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.  The natural aptitude of the French for
as the vacant profile of the whale; which, so far as picturesqueness of
background, both drooping together in the breezeless air.  The effect is very
black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the Patagonian
boat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity, is about giving
but in so important a matter it was certainly an oversight not to have
by some experienced whaleman.  The French are the lads for painting action.
caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer.  Thus, the foreground is
charge of crowned centaurs?  Not wholly unworthy of a place in that gallery,
chase to whales in the distance.  The harpoons and lances lie levelled for
cliffs.  His jets are erect, full, and black like soot; so that from so
consecutive great battles of France; where every sword seems a flash of the
crabs, shell-fish, and other sea candies and maccaroni, which the Right Whale
effect is concerned, is about tantamount to sketching the profile of a
either practically conversant with his subject, or else marvellously tutored
engravings of boat hooks, chopping knives, and grapnels; and with the
fine, when considered with reference to its presenting the hardy fishermen
gallery of living and breathing commotion on canvas, as in that triumphal
glassy level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails of the
hall at Versailles; where the beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through the
himself h.  durand.  one of them, though not precisely
in his wake, and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff
leviathan is rushing through the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds
like a rearing horse.  From the ship, the smoke of the torments of the boiling
loosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms in the
mean no disparagement to the excellent voyager (I honor him for a veteran),
microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the inspection of a
miniatures of narwhales and porpoises, treats us to a series of classical
of the Peace.  In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are
only finished sketches at all capable of conveying the real spirit of the
paintings and engravings they have of their whaling scenes.  With not one
powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead whale, a conquered fortress,
procured for every crystal a sworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice
pyramid.  Even Scoresby, the justly renowned Right whaleman, after giving us
quite a different affair: the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the
seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical outline of things, such
seizing the picturesqueness of things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what
shivering world ninety-six fac-similes of magnified Arctic snow crystals.  I
sometimes carries on his pestilent back.  And all the while the thick-lipped
spout-hole.
sudden roll of the sea, the little craft stands half-erect out of the water,
supper cooking in the great bowels below.  Sea fowls are pecking at the small
tenth of England's experience in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of
that of the Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both nations with the
two other French engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribes
under one of their few aspects of oriental repose.  The other engraving is
use; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in its hole; while from a
very heart of the Leviathanic life, with a Right Whale alongside; the vessel
whale hunt.  For the most part, the English and American whale draughtsmen
whale is going up like the smoke over a village of smithies; and to
whaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on board; the
windward, a black cloud, rising up with earnest of squalls and rains, seems
with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-pole inserted into his



     Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts, we
     so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden
     trace out great whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them;
.. < chapter lviii 11  BRIT >
.. <p 272 >
.. <p 272 >
.. <p 273 >
But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at all
Hydrus and the Flying Fish.  With a frigate's anchors for my bridle-bitts and
Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner separated from the water
accursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bear comparative
analogy to him.  But though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants
and joined the chase against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of
and round
and were stationary for a while, their vast black forms looked more like
as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies locked
bare, blackened elevations of the soil; even so, often, with him, who for the
believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth can possibly be instinct, in all
chronicled them.  Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to
coming to specialties, where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish
consideration will teach, that however baby man may brag of his science and
countries of India, the stranger at a distance will sometimes pass on the
disasters have immemorially and indiscriminately befallen tens and hundreds
even so these monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound; and
fasces of harpoons for spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the
feelings that you do those of the shore.  For though some old naturalists have
fell in with vast meadows of brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which
first time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea.  And even when
from the attack of a Sperm Whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws sluggishly
in battle among the clouds.  Thus at the North have I chased Leviathan round
latitude and longitude of your first stand-point, else so chance-like are
leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.
lifeless masses of rock than anything else.  And as in the great hunting
maintained that all creatures of the land are of their kind in the sea; and
me.  And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis,
of the seas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and
of thousands of those who have gone upon the waters; though but a moment's
of whales defined along the undulating ridges.  But you must be a thorough
other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of the deep with the same
parts, with the same sort of life that lives in a dog or a horse.  Indeed, in
plains recumbent elephants without knowing them to be such, taking them for
recognised at last, their immense magnitude renders it very hard really to
remain incognita, though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera
reminded one of mowers.  Seen from the mast-heads, especially when they paused
repelling; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita, so
require a laborious re-discovery; like the Solomon islands, which still
seethingly advance their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads;
such observations of the hills, that your precise, previous stand-point would
superficial western one; though, by vast odds, the most terrific of all mortal
swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing fibres of that wondrous
tents really lie encamped beyond my mortal sight!
that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover his one
that escaped at the lip.  As morning mowers, who side by side slowly and
that in disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog?  The
the Pole with the revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to
the Right Whale largely feeds.  For leagues and leagues it undulated round us,
though taking a broad general view of the thing, this may very well be; yet
to such a sight again, you must be sure and take the exact intersecting
topmost skies, to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless
whaleman, to see these sights; and not only that, but if you wish to return
wheat.  On the second day, numbers of Right Whales were seen, who, secure


     What was it, Sir?  said Flask.  The great live squid, which they say, few
     With reference to the whaling scene shortly to
-- There!  there again!  there she breaches!  right ahead!  The White Whale,
.. < chapter lx 26  THE LINE >
.. <p 276 >
.. <p 277 >
.. <p 277 >
Ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to the vessel; the rest
Ahab stood on the bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind in readiness
Squid.  The manner in which the Bishop describes it, as alternately rising
a nest of anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within
act of feeding, the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones
all swiftly pulling towards their prey.  Soon it went down, and while, with
and sinking, with some other particulars he narrates, in all this the two
as silently following.  Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general
be described, as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes
belong, but only as the Anak of the tribe.
below the surface; and only by inference is it that any one can tell of what,
betrayed him; whichever way it might have been, no sooner did he distinctly
bulk he assigns it.  By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the
connect the ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the
correspond.  But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible
cuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would seem to
declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet very few of
disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid; some of them
either sensation or instinct; but undulated there on the billows, an
for lowering.  The four boats were soon on the water; Ahab's in advance, and
have connected with the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse
his eager glance in the direction indicated aloft by the outstretched
innumerable long arms radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting like
it sank, once more it slowly rose.  Almost forgetting for the moment all
length and breadth, of a glancing cream-color, lay floating on the water,
motionless arm of Daggoo.  Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and
mysterious creature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of
oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo!  in the same spot where
of it being so very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest it with
of the ocean; and that the sperm whale, unlike other species, is supplied
particular whale he pursued; however this was, or whether his eagerness
perceive the white mass, than with a quick intensity he instantly gave orders
portentousness.  So rarely is it beheld, that though one and all of them
precisely, that food consists.  At times, when closely pursued, he will
reach.  No perceptible face or front did it have; no conceivable token of
secret seas have hitherto revealed to mankind.  A vast pulpy mass, furlongs in
seen Moby Dick and fought him, than to have seen thee, thou white ghost!
solitary jet had gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared to
sound it slowly disappeared again, Starbuck still gazing at the agitated
species of whales find their food above water, and may be seen by man in the
stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod, the negro yelled out
swarming-time the bees rush to the boughs.  Bare-headed in the sultry sun,
that the great Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into
the White Whale!  Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in
the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed
the most vague ideas concerning its true nature and form;  notwithstanding,
them have any but
they believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food.  For though other
thoughts of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the most wondrous phenomenon which the
thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length.  They fancy that
to wave his orders to the helmsman, cast
unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.  As with a low sucking
waters where it had sunk, with a wild voice exclaimed -- Almost rather had I
whale-ships ever beheld, and returned to their ports to tell of it.  But
with teeth in order to attack and tear it.  There seems some ground to imagine




     If to Starbuck the apparition of
     and the ball, and the explosion; so the graceful repose of the line, as it
     terror, than though seated before your evening fire with a poker, and not a
     this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other aspect of
.. < chapter lxi 17  STUBB KILLS A WHALE >
.. <p 280 >
.. <p 281 >
.. <p 281 >
It is worse; for you cannot sit motionless in the heart of these perils,
account for those repeated whaling disasters --some few of which are casually
and is then
and lost.  For, when the line is darting out, to be seated then in the boat,
and prophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;
and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) being coiled upon the box in
and, like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward, the six men
any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all these horrible
apparently precedes
attached to the short-warp --the rope which is immediately connected with the
because the boat is rocking like a cradle, and you are pitched one way and
boat in its complicated coils, twisting and writhing around it in almost
bow of his hoisted boat, then you quick see him 'parm whale.  The next day
chronicled --of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line,
circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones to
composing the crew pull into the jaws of death, with a halter around every
contains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal powder,
contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings; he cannot be thus
escape being made a Mazeppa of, and run away with where the all-seeing sun
every direction.  All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions; so
for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm; and
habit accomplish? --Gayer sallies, more merry mirth, better jokes, and brighter
half-inch white cedar of the whale-boat, when thus hung in hangman's nooses;
harpoon, by your side.
harpoon; but previous to that connexion, the short-warp goes through sundry
himself could never pierce you out.  Again: as the profound calm which only
in a slight festoon over the bows, and is then passed inside the boat again;
in full play, when every flying beam, and shaft, and wheel, is grazing you.
intricacies, and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink him that at
is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine
mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempen
mystifications too tedious to detail.  Thus the whale-line folds the whole
neck, as you may say.  Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to
object.  When you see him 'quid, said the savage, honing his harpoon in the
of a common quill, prevents it from slipping out.  From the chocks it hangs
quiver in him like a shaken jelly.  Yet habit --strange thing!  what cannot
repartees, you never heard over your mahogany, than you will hear over the
self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness of volition and action, can you
silent, subtle, ever-present perils of life.  And if you be a philosopher,
silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play --
that to the timid eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with
the Pequod's crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced by such a
the Squid was a thing of portents, to Queequeg it was quite a different
the bows, it continues its way to the gunwale still a little further aft,
the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs.  Nor can any son of
the other, without the slightest warning; and only by a certain
this dangerous affair.  But why say more?  All men live enveloped in
though seated in the whale-boat, you would not at heart feel one whit more of
vacant sea.  For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then were
was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special to engage them,
whale-lines.  All are born with halters round their necks; but it is only
when caught in the swift, sudden turn of death, that mortals realize the
.. <p 285 >
.. <p 286 >
Kee-hee!  yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat,
Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length the whale
a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled with the steady fumes from his
after dart into the flying fish; at the word of command, the boat
all fins.  Stubb and Tashtego here changed places -- stem for stern --a
alternately sterning out of the way of the whale's horrible wallow, and then
an enemy's sharp two-edged sword by the blade, and that enemy all the time
and yells the keels cut the sea.  Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the
before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed through and through both
being more tight than a harpstring, you would have thought the craft had two
boat up to him, while yet the boat was being towed on.  Soon ranging up by
boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern, had
bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the slightest motion
bowsman!  and, facing round towards the whale, all hands began pulling the
by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and again sent it into
canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea.  Thus they rushed; each man
churning, as if cautiously seeking to feel after some gold watch that the
could hook it out.  But that gold watch he sought was the innermost life of
dashed the sea-water into it.  More turns were taken, so that the line began
double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity.  Whole Atlantics and
extending the entire length of the upper part of the boat, and from its now
foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar crouching almost
from his mouth.  Like desperadoes they tugged and they strained, till the
from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his flurry, the monster
from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff after puff from the mouth
from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating, cracking craft
his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee in the clumsy cleat, darted dart
holding its place.  The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark
horribly wallowed in his blood, over-wrapped himself in impenetrable, mad,
hurled.  Stern all!  The oarsmen backed water; the same moment something
in blood, which bubbled and seethed for furlongs behind in their wake.  The
it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of its increased rapid circlings,
keels -- one cleaving the water, the other the air --as the boat churned
lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it again and again,
like a pacing tiger in his cage.  Ka-la!  Koo-loo!  howled Queequeg, as if
line.  An instant before, Stubb had swiftly caught two additional turns with
long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there, carefully churning and
men.  And all the while, jet after jet of white smoke was agonizingly shot
monster like brooks down a hill.  His tormented body rolled not in brine but
much ado blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the clear
of Stubb's hands, from which the hand-cloths, or squares of quilted canvas
of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling in upon his crooked
on through both opposing elements at once.  A continual cascade played at the
pipe.  As the line passed round and round the loggerhead; so also, just
ranging up for another fling.  The red tide now poured from all sides of the
reflection into every face, so that they all glowed to each other like red
slanting sun playing upon this crimson pond in the sea, sent back its
smacking his lips over a mouthful of Grenadier's steak.  And thus with oars
sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally dropped.  It was like holding
somewhat slackened his flight.  Haul in --haul in!  cried Stubb to the
staggering business truly in that rocking commotion.  From the vibrating line
striving to wrest it out of your clutch.  Wet the line!  wet the line!  cried
stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated by the tub) who, snatching off his hat,
the fish's flank.  When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned his
the fish.  And now it is struck; for, starting
the whale.  Pull up --pull up!  he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning
van, still encouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing the smoke
welcome cry was heard -- Stand up, Tashtego! --give it to him!  The harpoon was
went hot and hissing along every one of their wrists.  It was the magical
whale might have swallowed, and which he was fearful of breaking ere he
whale relaxed in his wrath.  Pull up! --close to!  and the boat ranged along
with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being tossed to the


     Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out
     Stubb's whale had been killed some
.. < chapter lxiii 2  THE CROTCH >
.. < chapter lxiv 16  STUBB'S SUPPER >
.. <p 288 >
.. <p 289 >
.. <p 289 >
China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will draw a bulky freighted
all engaging one unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to
alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention.  It is a notched
as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall.  It is customary to have two
as they will not fail to elucidate several most important, however intricate
as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty
becomes impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like in his
captured and a corpse.  Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats
coils of box line (mentioned in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in
corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except at long
dangling, sharp-edged
darted without recovery.  All these particulars are faithfully narrated here,
distance from the ship.  It was a calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats,
except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman.  I know that this would
furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoon, whose other
hands.  Tumbled into the water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare
harpooneers of this world must start to their feet from out of idleness, and
harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first and second
in general, is it possible to secure it again until the whale is fairly
inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow, for the purpose of
instantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the coming drag,
instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its rest
intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the enormousness of the mass
iron is already connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that
irons.  But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with
junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand argosy we towed heavily
know that when the second iron is thrown overboard, it thenceforth becomes a
majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means been so much
most instances, prudently practicable.  But this critical act is not always
movements, to pitch the second iron into him.  Nevertheless, as the second
naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow.  Thereby the weapon is
not from out of toil.
of them, the twigs.  So, in productive subjects, grow the chapters.  The crotch
one should draw out, the other may still retain a hold.  It is a doubling of
or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in all directions.  Nor,
passages, in scenes hereafter to be painted.
several harpoons to bend on to the line should the first one be ineffectually
simultaneously dangling about him.  For, of course, each boat is supplied with
somehow and somewhere; else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all
sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase; but long experience in
stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, which is perpendicularly
such an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be
terror, skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling the lines,
that has caused them.  To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the
the chances.  But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous,
the line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one
the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the harpooneer
these qualities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of
thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggish
unattended with the saddest and most fatal casualties.  Furthermore: you must
various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me that in the vast
violent, convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron, it
we commenced the slow business of towing the trophy to the Pequod.  And now,
we moved.  For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or whatever they call it, in
weapon must, at all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat,



     Fellow-critters: I'se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise
     Talk to 'em gentlemanly.  Once more the sermon proceeded.  Your
     Who dat?  Den preach to him yourself, sullenly turning to go.  No, Cook;
'em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in moderation, but they
.. <p 293 >
.. <p 294 >
Fleece, as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
Stubb, approvingly, coax 'em to it; try that, and Fleece continued.  Do
There are those sharks now over the side, don't you see they prefer it tough
and rare?  What a shindy they are kicking up!  Cook, go and talk to 'em; tell
banquet that was going on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the
bitin' dare?  Cook, cried Stubb, collaring him, I wont have that swearing.
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways inclining
buried; and though one or two other like instances might be set down,
can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor!  you must stop dat
command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb's sideboard;
conciliating the devil.  But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the
congregate, and most hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or
dam racket!  Cook, here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a
dare.  you hear?  stop dat dam smackin' ob de lip!  massa Stubb say dat you
de tail!  How you tink to hear, 'spose you keep up such a dam slappin' and
decision about the propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of
deliver my message.  Here, take this lantern, snatching one from his
dish, as if stabbing with his lance; cook, you cook! --sail this way, cook!
galley, for, like many old blacks, there was something the matter with his
go on, go on.  Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters: -- Right!  exclaimed
he cried at length, widening his legs still further, as if to form a more
his congregation, with the other hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and
his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.  Cook, said Stubb, rapidly
his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shambling along from his
in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decently
iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old
lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck to the bulwarks; and then, with
leaning far over the side in a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks,
lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth, don't you think this steak is
more jovial spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a
must keep quiet.  Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.  Away, cook, and
occasion when you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or
one hand dropping his light low over the sea, so as to get a good view of
parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave
quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were
rather overdone?  You've been beating this steak too much, cook; it's too
same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all
secure base for his supper; and, at the same time darting his fork into the
ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy
sideboard; now then, go and preach to 'em!  Sullenly taking the offered
smacking of his own epicurean lips.  Cook, cook! --where's that old Fleece?
step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened
sudden slap on the shoulder, -- Cook!  why, damn your eyes, you mustn't swear
tender.  Don't I always say that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough?
that way when you're preaching.  That's no way to convert sinners, Cook!
the old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously routed from
touching the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do most socially
whale-ship at sea.  If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your
when,
while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that was said.
with both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I
you to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the
zay to you, fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness --'top dat dam slappin' ob







     Didn't say dat t'all, said Fleece, again in the sulks.  You said up there,
     That mortal man should feed upon
     Well then, cook; you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad, that I
     Whale-balls for breakfast --don't forget.  Wish, by gor!  whale eat him,
     body, is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the
     other end is secured to the ship.  By adroit management the wooden float is
     to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having girdled the made
'stead of him eat whale.  I'm bressed if he ain't more of shark dan Massa
.. < chapter lxv 12  THE WHALE AS A DISH >
.. <p 290n. >
.. <p 297 >
.. <p 297 >
A little item may as well be related here.  The strongest and most reliable
But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.  Cook, give
But don't you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets?  Main-top, eh?
But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by crawling through the lubber's
France, and commanded large prices there.  Also, that in Henry VIIIth's
Hold the steak in one hand, and show a live coal to it with the other; that
Shark hisself, muttered the old man, limping away; with which sage
admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember,
are a species of whale.  Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine
as you may say; this seems so outlandish a thing that one must needs go a
being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls.
cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put the chain round it.  But
causes it to sink low beneath the surface; so that with the hand you
centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was esteemed a great delicacy in
clap t'other a'top of your heart, when I'm giving my orders, cook.  What!
didn't you, and now look yourself, and see where your tongs are pointing.
done, dish it; d'ye hear?  And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in
done, or else it's no go.  But none of us are in heaven yet.  Drop your
eating.  The meat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls, and
ejaculation he went to his hammock.
for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here,
grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at one and the same time.
have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that, don't you?  Well,
hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside, is by the flukes
hole, cook; but no, no, cook, you don't get there, except you go the
little into the history and philosophy of it.  It is upon record, that three
me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.  D'ye hear?  away you
or tail; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier
pickle.  As for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook.  There, now
point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.
regular way, round by the rigging.  It's a ticklish business, but must be
sail, then. --Halloa!  stop!  make a bow before you go. --Avast heaving again!
than any other (excepting the side-fins), its flexibility even in death,
that your heart, there? --that's your gizzard!  Aloft!  aloft! --that's it --now
the capstan, I'll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing.
the creature that feeds his lamp, and, like Stubb, eat him by his own light,
the fish, be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in
the old black, with both hands placed as desired, vainly wriggling his
this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared
time, a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an
tongs, cook, and hear my orders.  Do ye hear?  Hold your hat in one hand, and
whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the
with a wooden float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the
ye may go.
you have it.  Hold it there now, and pay attention.  All 'dention, said



     When in the Southern Fishery, a
     that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea, these
.. < chapter lxvi 2  THE SHARK MASSACRE >
.. < chapter lxvii 23  CUTTING IN >
.. <p 300 >
.. <p 301 >
.. <p 301 >
.. <p 301n. >
Pacific, this plan will not answer at all; because such incalculable hosts
Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally
The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel; is about
a'lee; and then send every one below to his hammock till daylight, with the
about it.  Therefore, the common usage is to take in all sail; lash the helm
and ghosts of these creatures.  A sort of generic or Pantheistic vitality
and struggling hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this
brought about new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe.  They
captured Sperm Whale, after long and weary toil, is brought alongside late at
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on
deck to see that all goes well.  But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the
deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for immediately
diminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades, a
down; wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be
fat goose?  With a feather of the same fowl.  And with what quill did the
flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower.  This weapon
flexible bows, bent round, and bit their own; till those entrails seemed
god made him shark, said the savage, agonizingly lifting his hand up and
honed, just like a razor.  In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to
hours, say, on a stretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible by
indite his circulars?  It is only within the last month or two that that
individual life had departed.  Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his
is always kept as sharp as possible; and when being used is occasionally
laborious one; is not very soon completed; and requires all hands to set
morning.  In most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fish do not
murdering of the sharks, by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls,
nevertheless, upon stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
night, it is not, as a general thing at least, customary to proceed at once
of sharks gather round the moored carcase, that were he left so for six
one dam Ingin.
procedure notwithstanding, which, in some instances, only seems to tickle
reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches shall be kept; that is,
seemed to lurk in their very joints and bones, after what might be called the
seemingly their only vital part.  But in the foamy confusion of their mixed
sights, to have looked over her side that night, would have almost thought
skin, one of these sharks almost took poor Queequeg's hand off, when he
so largely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably
society passed a resolution to patronize nothing but steel pens.
suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns, so
swallowed over and over again by the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by
the bigness of a man's spread hand; and in general shape, corresponds to
the gaping wound.  Nor was this all.  It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses
the garden implement after which it is named; only its sides are perfectly
the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those sharks the maggots in it.
them into still greater activity.  But it was not thus in the present case
thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.
to the business of cutting him in.  For that business is an exceedingly
tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.  Queequeg no care what
two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in rotation shall mount the
two mariners, darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an incessant
viciously snapped, not only at each other's disembowelments, but like
with the Pequod's sharks; though, to be sure, any man unaccustomed to such
you are eating?  And what do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that

     I have given no small attention to that
.. < chapter lxviii 29  THE BLANKET >
.. <p 304 >
.. <p 305 >
England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to bear the marks of
My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is only an opinion.  The
Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one hundred barrels of oil; and, when it
a plate representing the old Indian characters chiselled on the famous
allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of another thing.  Besides all the
also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are probably made by hostile
altogether of an irregular, random aspect.  I should say that those New
and soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only
any rate, it is pleasant to read about whales through their own spectacles,
arguments against such a presumption; because you cannot raise any other
array, something like those in the finest Italian line engravings.  But these
as you may say.  But what I am driving at here is this.  That same infinitely
be but the skin?  True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may
body itself.  Nor is this all.  In some instances, to the quick, observant
close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and ranges from
contracts and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle.  I have several
dense enveloping layer from the whale's body but that same blubber; and the
eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.  Now, however
eye, those linear marks, as in a veritable engraving, but afford the ground
for far other delineations.  These are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call
hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the Upper Mississippi.  Like those
his blubber is.  That blubber is something of the consistence of firm,
idea may hence be had of the enormousness of that animated mass, a mere part
integument yields such a lake of liquid as that.  Reckoning ten barrels to the
is considered that, in quantity, or rather weight, that oil, in its expressed
marks do not seem to be impressed upon the isinglass substance above
mentioned, but seem to be seen through it, as if they were engraved upon the
mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale remains undecipherable.  This
not unvexed subject, the skin of the whale.  I have had controversies about it
of the whale's skin.  In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not
of whose mere
other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm Whale presents, he not
outermost enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can that
over obliquely crossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick
part of the regular linear appearance, by reason of numerous rude scratches,
preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature's skin as being of
question is, what and where is the skin of the whale?  Already you know what
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible
scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
seldom displays the back, and more especially his flanks, effaced in great
skin of a new-born child.  But no more of this.  Assuming the blubber to be the
skin of the skin, so to speak; for it were simply ridiculous to say, that
skin of the whale; then, when this skin, as in the case of a very large
sometimes pleased myself with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence.  At
state, is only three fourths, and not the entire substance of the coat; some
such dried bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books.  It is
that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point of fact these are no
the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in particular, I was much struck with
the least among the many marvels he presents.  Almost invariably it is all
the proper skin of the tremendous whale is thinner and more tender than the
the proper word to use in the present connexion.  By my retentive memory of
thin, isinglass substance, which, I admit, invests the entire body of the
those mysterious cyphers on the walls of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is
those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in this particular.  It
ton, you have ten tons for the net weight of only three quarters of the stuff
transparent, as I said before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have
violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs --I should say, that
whale, is not so much to be regarded as the skin of the creature, as the
with experienced whalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore.

     It should not have been omitted that
.. < chapter lxx 14  THE SPHYNX >
.. <p 308 >
.. <p 308 >
.. <p 309 >
.. <p 310 >
Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat, upon
There's your law of precedents; there's your utility of traditions; there's
accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went below to their dinner.  Silence
adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a critical
anchors rot; where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with
and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a calm, it
attempt weighing a Dutch barn in jewellers' scales The Pequod's whale being
buoyed up by its native element.  And there with the strained craft steeply
cable till the body is stripped.  That done, if it belong to a small whale it
calm, like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more unfolding its
decapitated and the body stripped, the head was hoisted against the ship's
deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them.
earth, and now not even hovering in the air!  There's orthodoxy!  Thus, while
even by the immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing as to
ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear of all
foundations.  Where unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and
giant Holofernes's from the girdle of Judith.  When this last task was
half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-wise under one arm, and so
his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world.  Are you a believer
in ghosts, my friend?  There are other ghosts than the Cock-Lane one, and far
in life the great whale's body may have been a real terror to his foes, in
is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of.  But, with a full grown
leaning over to it, by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower
leviathan this is impossible; for the sperm whale's head embraces nearly one
lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us the secret thing
main-chains he took Stubb's long spade --still remaining there after the
mast-head, and every yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the
muttered Ahab, which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and there
neck; on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that
noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.  A short space elapsed, and up into
oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea.  Bear in mind, too, that under these
operate from above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his
perhaps, ships shun the place; leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a
point hard by its insertion into the skull.  Do you not marvel,
previous to completely stripping the body of the leviathan, he was beheaded.
quarter-deck, he paused to gaze over the side, then slowly getting into the
reason.  Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a
reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted deck.  An intense copper
seemed the Sphynx's in the desert.  Speak, thou vast and venerable head,
side --about half way out of the sea, so that it might yet in great part be
stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.  It was a black
subject, and that subject almost hidden in a discolored, rolling, and
subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into the
that head upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world's
that is in thee.  Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest.
the story of your obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the
then, at Stubb's boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm
third of his entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that,
this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his cabin.  Taking a few turns on the
untoward circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
vacuum, because their leader originally leaped there when a stick was held.
very place, is the thickest part of him.  Remember, also, that the surgeon must
waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod's waist like the
whale's decapitation --and striking it into the lower part of the
whale?  When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a
which experienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves; and not without
years afterwards,



     Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam, and a certain
     thou must either-- But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far
.. <p 313 >
.. <p 314 >
According to this account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that
Beware of the horrible plague!  Gabriel, Gabriel!  cried Captain Mayhew;
Gabriel started to his feet.  Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious!
He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan.  Nor would they permit Gabriel
Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a
Pequod.  I fear not thy epidemic, man, said Ahab from the bulwarks
So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed -- That's
a god.  Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are
ahead, and its seethings drowned all speech.  Hast thou seen the White Whale?
an atmosphere of sacredness.  Moreover, they were afraid of him.  As such a
broke out in a freshet.  He announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and
but straightway upon the ship's getting out of sight of land, his insanity
by one of those occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it.
commanded the captain to jump overboard.  He published his manifesto, whereby
declared these things; --the dark, daring play of his sleepless, excited
demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted back.  Think, think of thy whale-boat,
descended from heaven by the way of a trap-door, announcing the speedy
disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they went to the captain and
ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his sole command;
everybody in the Jeroboam.  His story was this: He had been originally
faded walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping sleeves of which were
for the Jeroboam's whaling voyage.  They engaged him;
great prophet; in their cracked, secret meetings having several times
have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual's intention was to
he set himself forth as the deliverer of the isles of the sea and
he!  that's he!  the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho's company told us of!
imagination, and all the preternatural terrors of real delirium, united to
in case this intention was carried out.  So strongly did he work upon his
instead of containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with laudanum.  A
invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority of the ignorant crew, with
land him in the first convenient port, the archangel forthwith opened all his
man among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.
man, however, was not of much practical use in the ship, especially as he
mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried a higher hand than
measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless power
mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in
nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure.  The sailors,
nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers, where he had been a
obedience to his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to
of deceiving and bedevilling so many others.  But it is time to return to the
opening of the seventh vial, which he carried in his vest-pocket; but, which,
refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous captain would fain
rolled up on his wrists.  A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was in his eyes.
said for some moments, while a succession of riotous waves rolled by, which
seals and vials -- devoting the ship and all hands to unconditional perdition,
steady, common sense exterior and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
stoven and sunk!  Beware of the horrible tail!  I tell thee again, Gabriel,
strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna for
that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship.  The consequence of all
that-- But again the boat tore ahead as if dragged by fiends.  Nothing was
the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for the captain and
to Captain Mayhew, who stood in the boat's stern; come on board.  But now
to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would; so that it came to pass
told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man of them would remain.
true.  Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the
vicar-general of all Oceanica.  The unflinching earnestness with which he



    
     Captain Mayhew, stand by now to receive it; and taking the fatal missive
     the Pequod had gradually drifted into a sea, which, by its occasional
--the man's wife, I'll wager) -- Aye --Mr. Harry Macey, Ship Jeroboam; --why
.. < chapter lxxiii 23  STUBB AND FLASK KILL A RIGHT WHALE; AND THEN HAVE >
.. <p 317 >
.. <p 317 >
.. <p 322 >
A TALK OVER HIM It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm
Ahab; thou art soon going that way.  Curses throttle thee!  yelled Ahab.
An interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act of being
Death himself might well have been the post-boy.  Can'st not read it?  cried
Gabriel
Stubb's and Flask's, were detached in pursuit.  Pulling further and further
Whale's prodigious head hanging to the Pequod's side.  But we must let it
ahab.  give it me, man.  aye, aye it's but a dim scrawl; --what's this?  As
all their might so as to get ahead of the ship.  For a few minutes the
alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all, the announcement was made
and soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast.
anywhere near.  And though all hands commonly disdained the capture of those
away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at the mast-head.  But
clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, and impaling the letter on
come to the hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but
consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin.  Of such a letter,
continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it.  For
dragged right towards the ship by the towing whale.  So close did the monster
from Starbuck's hands, he caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it
from rowing; the boat drifted a little towards the ship's stern; so that, as
hand it to the boat, without its coming any closer to the ship.  Meantime, Ahab
having plenty of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not sounding very
he was studying it out, Starbuck took a long cutting-spade pole, and with his
holding the letter, muttered, Mr. Har--yes, Mr. Harry--(a woman's pinny hand,
if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel's eager hand.  He
inferior creatures; and though the Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for
interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the whale, many
it's Macey, and he's dead!  Poor fellow!  poor fellow!  and from his wife,
it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.  It fell at Ahab's feet.  Then
knife slightly split the end, to insert the letter there, and in that way,
of the Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking
over towards the boat.  But as he did so, the oarsmen expectantly desisted
patches of
point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel's side.  But
rapidly, they paid out abundance of rope, and at the same time pulled with
shrieked out to his comrades to give way with their oars, and in that manner
sighed Mayhew; but let me have it.  Nay, keep it thyself, cried Gabriel to
strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair.
struggle was intensely critical; for while they still slacked out the
suddenly going down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he
suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water,
that a Right Whale should be captured that day, if opportunity offered.  Nor
the cry from the ship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the
the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from the Pequod.  As, after this
the present other matters press, and the best we can do now for the head, is
them at all, and though she had passed numbers of them near the Crozetts
tightened line in one direction, and still plied their oars in another, the
to pray heaven the tackles may hold.  Now, during the past night and forenoon,
was sorely tumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in
was this long wanting.  Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two boats,
wholly disappeared from view, as if diving under the keel.  Cut, cut!  was
without lowering a boat; yet now that a Sperm Whale had been brought
yellow brit, gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales, a species


     Am I the same man that helped kill this whale?  Doesn't the devil live for
     never saw such a book; heard of it, though.  But now, tell me, Stubb, do you
.. <p 325 >
.. <p 326 >
But nothing like this, in the present case, had been done.  The carcases of
Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?  Do I suppose it?  You'll know it
Fedallah's age.  Nor all the coopers in creation couldn't show hoops enough to
Flask's saying proved true.  As before, the Pequod steeply leaned over towards
Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat.  Oh, ye foolish!  throw all
a mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.  Meantime, Fedallah was
all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece.
an ox whip when we get home; -- what else?  Now, do you mean what you say,
and have been saying all along, stubb?  Mean or not mean, here we are at
and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him go about
before long, Flask.  But I am going now to keep a sharp look-out on him; and
bloody-minded soldadoes?  Did ye read it there, Flask?  I guess ye did?  No;
both whales had dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled
can't remember where.  Three Spaniards?  Adventures of those three
chance.  Now, if he's so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he
devil kidnapped, he'd roast for him?  There's a governor!  Do you suppose
devil?  Who's afraid of him, except the old governor who daresn't catch him
disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the ship, the
duck you, though -- yes, and drown you --what then?  I should like to see him
ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead?  Did you ever see any parson a
for his tail, take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and
former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck, with
he'll sneak off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his
heaving, that his tail will come short off at the stump --do you see; and
her even keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe.  So, when on one
him again; and keep ducking him.  Suppose he should take it into his head to
his face in the admiral's cabin again for a long while, let alone down in the
if I see anything very suspicious going on, I'll just take him by the nape
is going to live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him overboard --tell
it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord I'll make a grab into his pocket
just now, that you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good
kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the people the
legs.  And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?  Do with it?  Sell it for
make oughts enough.  but see here, stubb, i thought you a little boasted
me that?  Give him a good ducking, anyhow.  But he'd crawl back.  Duck
now on board the Pequod?
now take all the hoops in the Pequod's hold, and string 'em along in a row
of his neck, and say --Look here, Beelzebub, you don't do
orlop there, where he lives, and hereabouts on the upper decks where he
right whale's head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti's.  In good time,
same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm
securing him.  Didn't I tell you so?  said Flask; yes, you'll soon see this
side you hoist in Locke's head, you go over that way; but now, on the other
side, hoist in Kant's and you come back again; but in very poor plight.
side, where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for
sneaks so much.  Damn the devil, Flask; do you suppose I'm afraid of the
suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was the same you say is
that mainmast there?  pointing to the ship; well, that's the figure one;
that, Mr. Flask?  How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?  Do you see
the admiral's cabin, don't you suppose he can crawl into a port-hole?  Tell me
the ship.  The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard
the sperm whale's head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads, she regained
then, I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion,
these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.  In
try it; I'd give him such a pair of black eyes that he wouldn't dare to show
wearing mourning for the devil?  And if the devil has a latch-key to get into
whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut off whole, but in the
with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that wouldn't begin to be


     I think that all this indirectly proceeds from the helpless perplexity of
     into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach.  But let us hold on here
.. <p 330 >
boats; the timidity and liability to queer frights, so common to such whales;
bring your mind to bear on it, the other will be utterly excluded from your
by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down the mouth; and were it not that
by this tooth, and look about us where we are.  What a really beautiful and
cases this lower jaw --being easily unhinged by a practised artist --is
chaste-looking mouth!  from floor to ceiling, lined, or rather papered with a
comprehensive, combining, and subtle than man's, that he can at the same
contemporary consciousness.  How is it, then, with the whale?  True, both his
disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting the ivory teeth,
eyes, in themselves, must simultaneously act; but is his brain so much more
fishery, upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force.  But far more
glistening white membrane, glossy as bridal satins.  But come out now, and
have relaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight, a reproach
heads for hours, and never discover that organ.  The ear has no external leaf
hearing?  Not at all. -- Why then do you try to enlarge your mind?  Subtilize
him, and the other in an exactly opposite direction?  If he can, then is it as
hint.  so long as a man's eyes are open in the light, the act of seeing is
idle whim, but it has always seemed to me, that the extraordinary
immense snuff-box, with a hinge at one end, instead of one side.  If you pry
imperceptible from without.  Is it not curious, that so vast a being as the
investigated, is there any incongruity in this comparison.  It may be but an
involuntary; that is, he cannot then help mechanically seeing whatever
it is quite impossible for him, attentively, and completely, to examine any
it up, so as to get it overhead, and expose its rows of teeth, it seems a
it.  Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand, cant
latter is entirely and evenly covered over with a membrane, so as to be quite
like a ship's jib-boom.  This whale is not dead; he is only dispirited; out
long, hanging straight down at right-angles with his body, for all the world
look at this portentous lower jaw, which seems like the long narrow lid of an
marvellous a thing in him, as if a man were able simultaneously to go through
moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects, one on one side of
must involve them.  But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye.  If
now come to separate these two objects, and surround each by a circle of
objects are before him.  Nevertheless, any one's experience will teach him,
of cathedrals; would that make him any longer of sight, or sharper of
of sorts, perhaps; hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges of his jaw
over the sperm whale's head, so that it may lie bottom up; then, ascending
profound darkness; then, in order to see one of them, in such a manner as to
right.  While the ear of the former has an external opening, that of the
terrible is it to behold, when fathoms down in the sea, you see some sulky
terrific portcullis; and such, alas!  it proves to many a poor wight in the
that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance,
the body is now completely separated from it, with a lantern we might descend
the demonstrations of two distinct problems in Euclid.  Nor, strictly
the lens of Herschel's great telescope; and his ears capacious as the porches
this visual matter as touching the Leviathan.  But I must be content with a
through an ear which is smaller than a hare's?  But if his eyes were broad as
time; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other.  But if you
to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, imprecate lock-jaws upon him.  In most
to their ears, this important difference is to be observed between the sperm
two things --however large or however small --at one and the same instant of
vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when beset by three or four
volition, in which their divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision
whale and the
whale should see the world through so small an eye, and hear the thunder
whale, floating there suspended, with his prodigious jaw, some fifteen feet
whatever; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill, so
wondrously minute is it.  It is lodged a little behind the eye.  With respect
you are an entire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two



     Ere quitting, for the nonce, the
     and fifty fins growing on each side of his upper chop, which arch over his
     the Right Whale has two external spout-holes, the Sperm Whale only one.
--particularly remark its front aspect, in all its compacted collectedness.  I
.. < chapter lxxvi 24  THE BATTERING-RAM >
.. <p 333 >
.. <p 333n. >
.. <p 334 >
.. <p 334 >
But mark the other head's expression.  See that amazing lower lip, pressed by
Look your last, now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they yet lie
Sperm Whale's head, I would have you, as a sensible physiologist, simply
This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker, or rather
Whale, a Platonian, who might have taken up Spinoza in his latter years.
a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the upper part of
accident against the vessel's side, so as firmly to embrace the jaw.  Does
amount of oil.  Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I
analogical probability.  At any rate, if we yield to it, we must grant a far
and gazing upon its thousand pipes?  For a carpet to the organ we have a rug
be lodged there.  Here is a vital point; for you must either satisfactorily
be very long in following.  Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale's
blinds and whiskers for a moment, and, standing in the Right Whale's mouth,
blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcely anything of a tongue.  Again,
brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance.
bristles, fins, whiskers, blinds, or whatever you please, furnish to
certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable, yet it has the savor of
different heads.  To sum up, then; in the Right Whale's there is no great
facing death?  This Right Whale I take to have been a Stoic; the Sperm
fashion.  And as those ancient dames moved about gaily, though in the jaws of
forehead seem now faded away.  I think his broad brow to be full of a
greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem reasonable.  In
in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language: There are about two hundred
inside of the whale's mouth; another, hogs' bristles; a third old gentleman
it on deck.  This particular tongue now before us; at a passing glance I
jaw, like the Sperm Whale's.  Nor in the Sperm Whale are there any of those
look around you afresh.  Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically
not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practical resolution in
of the softest Turkey --the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to the floor of
old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning
particular, the demand has long been on the decline.  It was in Queen Anne's
prairie-like placidity, born of a speculative indifference as to death.
ranged about, would you not think you were inside the great Haarlem organ,
settle this matter with yourself, or for ever remain an infidel as to one of
should say it was a six-barreler; that is, it will yield you about that
some unexaggerated, intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may
started with --that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely
the creature's age, as the age of an oak by its circular rings.  Though the
the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances.  But in this
the most appalling,
the mouth.  It is very fat and tender, and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting
the outer end of the lower jaw.  Sometimes these tufts impart a rather
the whale, as you may say; even so, in a shower, with the like
there?  It is the same he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the
these blinds.  One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous whiskers
thoughtlessness, do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection; the
time that the bone was in its glory, the farthingale being then all the
together; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea; the other will not
tongue on each side of his mouth.  As every one knows, these same hogs'
umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone.  But now forget all about
well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mandible of a lower
would have you investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself





     Now comes the Baling of
     and then you have two almost equal parts, which before were naturally
     its broad forward end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the
     last elevated out of the water, and retained in that position by the
     yet, upon
--almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm Whale's great Heidelburgh Tun is
.. < chapter lxxvii 2  THE GREAT HEIDELBURGH TUN >
.. <p 337 >
.. <p 337n. >
.. <p 338 >
.. <p 339 >
And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front, so the whale's
As in decapitating the whale, the operator's instrument is brought close to
I know not that it has been defined before.  A quoin is a solid which differs
Quoin is not a Euclidean term.  It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics.
Tun of the Sperm Whale embraces the entire length of the entire top of the
adornment of his wondrous tun.  Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh was always
beautiful crystalline shoots, as when the first thin delicate ice is just
costly material the heidelburgh Tun was coated within, but in superlative
curious internal structure of the thing operated upon.  Regarding the Sperm
divide it into two quoins, whereof the lower is the bony structure, forming
divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance.  The lower
elastic white fibres throughout its whole extent.  The upper part, known as
enormous cutting tackles, whose hempen combinations, on one side, make
exposure to the air, after death, it soon begins to concrete; sending forth
feet for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth
forming in water.  A large whale's case generally yields about five hundred
from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one
gallons of sperm, though from unavoidable circumstances, considerable of it
head; and since --as has been elsewhere set forth --the head embraces one third
in any other part of the creature.  Though in life it remains perfectly fluid,
invaluable contents.  It is this decapitated end of the head, also, which is at
is spilled, leaks, and dribbles away, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the
limpid, and odoriferous state.  Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed
magazine; he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful, lest a careless,
now, I pray you, to that marvellous and --in this particular instance
of the tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship's side.
of the whole length of the creature, then setting that length down at eighty
pearl-colored membrane, like the line of a fine pelisse, forming the inner
quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter.  Thus much being said, attend
replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys, so
richness that coating could not possibly have compared with the silken
side, instead of the mutual tapering of both sides.
subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycomb of oil, formed by
surface of the Sperm Whale's case.  It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh
tapped.
the Case, may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale.
the Case.  But to comprehend it aright, you must know something of the
the cranium and jaws, and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones;
the crossing and re-crossing, into ten thousand infiltrated cells, of tough
the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the spermaceti
the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily
ticklish business of securing what you can.  I know not with what fine and
untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly let out its
vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical
veil at Sais?
vintages; namely, the highly-prized spermaceti, in its absolutely pure,
whale's head as a solid oblong, you may, on an inclined plane, sideways
whale.  At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin,



     and all caught their breath, as half swinging --now over the sailors' heads,
     poor Tash by the head.  He averred, that upon first thrusting in for him, a
     will ye!  Stand clear of the tackle!  cried a voice like the bursting of a
--cried daggoo again with a joyful shout; and soon after, Queequeg was seen
.. <p 342 >
Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished?  Why, diving after the
Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the sea!  But hardly had
a little off from the ship.  Ha!  ha!  cried Daggoo, all at once, from his
an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave.  both!  both! --it is both!
and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost.  But the tendency to rapid
and now over the water --Daggoo, through a thick mist of spray, was dimly
be sagaciously urged, how is this?  We thought the tissued, infiltrated head
beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles, while poor, buried-alive
boldly striking out with one hand, and with the other clutching the long hair
brisk.
buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted out.  In heaven's name,
by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it, so that it sank
deliverance, or rather, delivery of Tashtego, was successfully accomplished,
dexterous heave and toss, had wrought a somerset upon the Indian; so that
diver could be seen.  Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside, and pushed
drop, he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the foul
dropped into the sea, like Niagara's Table-Rock into the whirlpool; the
falling into a cistern ashore; an accident which not seldom happens, and
for the great head itself, that was doing as well as could be expected.  And
hammered substance, as I have before said, much heavier than the sea water,
in the teeth, too, of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments;
its hand, was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks.  The
itself.  We have thee there.  Not at all, but I have ye; for at the time
landsmen, though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one's
leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well --a double welded,
leg was presented; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be, and
line, rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well, meaning that the
man, cried Stubb, are you ramming home a cartridge there? --Avast!  How
might occasion great trouble; -- he had thrust back the leg, and by a
near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there; then dropping his
next, a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the
now quiet, swinging perch overhead; and looking further off from the side,
of the Indian.  Drawn into the waiting boat, they were quickly brought to
of the Sperm Whale, was the lightest and most corky part about him; and yet
poor Tash fell in, the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents,
queer adventure of the Gay-Header's will be sure to seem incredible to some
rescue.  One packed rush was made to the side, and every eye counted every
ripple, as moment followed moment, and no sign of either the sinker or the
rocket.  Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous mass
sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted
slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale's well.  But, peradventure, it may
slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made side lunges
suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down her glittering copper;
sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards, and so hauled out our
the blinding vapor cleared away, when a naked figure with a boarding-sword in
the deck; but Tashtego was long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very
the same course with fencing and boxing, riding and rowing.  I know that this
thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than
thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg, the
very slowly and deliberately indeed, affording Queequeg a fair chance for
we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as
which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten.  Midwifery should be taught in
will that help him; jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head?  Avast,
with much less reason too than the Indian's, considering the exceeding
with one hand holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should
with the next trial, he came forth in the good old way --head foremost.  As

     If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a
.. < chapter lxxx 2  THE NUT >
.. <p 345 >
.. <p 346 >
.. <p 347 >
Egypt of every man's and every being's face.  Physiognomy, like every other
Leviathan, in the creature's living intact state, is an entire delusion.  As
Read if it you can.
Sphinx, to the phrenologist his brain seems that geometrical circle which it
The whale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to the common
and from the same point of view.  Indeed, place this reversed skull (scaled
behind its vast outworks, like the innermost citadel within the amplified
child-magian thoughts.  they deified the crocodile of the nile, because the
convolutions, to their apprehensions, it seems more in keeping with the idea
crater -- in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and as many
crater to bed that part of the mass; while under the long floor of this
crocodile is tongueless; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue, or as least it
cubic-yards of his sperm magazine.  Lying in strange folds, courses, and
depression in the forehead's middle, which, in man, is Lavater's mark of
diminish; though that way viewed, its grandeur does not domineer upon you
doing nothing particular to prove it.  It is moreover declared in his
down to the human magnitude) among a plate of men's skulls, and you would
ears, or mouth; no face; he has none, proper; nothing but that one broad
egotistical sky; in the now unhaunted hill; then be sure, exalted to Jove's
firmament of a forehead, pleated with riddles; dumbly lowering with the doom
for his true brain, you can then see no indications of it, nor feel any.
fortifications of Quebec.  So like a choice casket is it secreted in him,
genius.  But how?  Genius in the Sperm Whale?  Has the Sperm Whale ever
has any other brain than that palpable semblance of one formed by the
high seat, the great Sperm Whale shall lord it.  Champollion deciphered the
highly cultured, poetical nation shall lure back to their birth-right, the
human science, is but a passing fable.  If then, Sir William Jones, who
in depth --reposes the mere handful of this monster's brain.  The brain is at
inclined plane is angularly filled up, and almost squared by the enormous
intelligence.  It is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this
involuntarily confound it with them; and remarking the depressions on one
is impossible to square.  In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at
is so exceedingly small, as to be incapable of protrusion.  If hereafter any
known to the young Orient World, he would have been deified by their
least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life; it is hidden away
least twenty feet in length.  Unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of
merry May-day gods of old; and livingly enthrone them again in the now
more forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature.  For you see
no one point precisely; not one distinct feature is revealed; no nose, eyes,
of boats, and ships, and men.  Nor, in profile, does this wondrous brow
of his general might to regard that mystic part of him as the seat of his
of its rear end, which is the high end, you will be
part of its summit, in phrenological phrase you would say --This man had no
profounder and more subtle meanings, how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read
pyramidical silence.  And this reminds me that had the great Sperm Whale been
read in thirty languages, could not read the simplest peasant's face, in its
self-esteem, and no veneration.  And by those negations, considered along with
so.  In profile, you plainly perceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic
struck by its resemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation,
superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm.  At the high end the skull forms a
that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that the Sperm Whale
the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk and power, you can best form to
the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale's brow?  I but put that brow before you.
this skull is as the side view of a moderately inclined plane resting
throughout on a level base.  But in life --as we have elsewhere seen --this
world.  If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view
wrinkled granite hieroglyphics.  But there is no Champollion to decipher the
written a book, spoken a speech?  No, his great genius is declared in his


     Adverse winds are holding mad Christmas in him, boys.  It's the first foul
     raised from the mast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was
.. <p 350 >
.. <p 351 >
Derick, that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, he
Whether he had lost that fin in battle, or had been born without it, it were
abreast with great speed straight before the wind, rubbing their flanks as
as almost to defy pursuit for the time.  At this juncture, the Pequod's keel
before?  it must be, he's lost his tiller.  As an overladen Indiaman bearing
behind him to upbubble.  Who's got some paregoric?  said Stubb, he has the
bulk, and now and then partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose
buries, rolls, and wallows on her way; so did this old whale heave his aged
but he had not gained his ship's side, when whales were almost simultaneously
by the unusual yellowish incrustations overgrowing him, seemed afflicted
closely as so many spans of horses in harness.  They left a
completely overtake and pass him.  as for derick, he seemed quite confident
concluding by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is
cried Starbuck; he mocks and dares me with the very poor-box I filled for
deck, ahab abruptly accosted him, without at all heeding what he had in his
did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare.  As he mounted the
down the Hindostan coast with a deck load of frightened horses, careens,
eight whales, an average pod.  Aware of their danger, they were going all
followed him, had considerably the start of the Pequod's keels.  There were
formed when two hostile currents meet.  His spout was short, slow, and
game having risen to leeward, he and the other three German boats that soon
gone, and not a single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency;
great, wide wake, as though continually unrolling a great wide parchment upon
greyhounds!  Dog to it!  I tell ye what it is, men --cried Stubb to his crew
had had, Derick's boat still led the chase, though every moment neared by
had shot by the three German boats last lowered; but from the great start he
hand; but in his broken lingo, the German soon evinced his complete
hard to say.  Only wait a bit, old chap, and I'll give ye a sling for that
have him.  With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this
he don't sling thee with it, cried Starbuck.  Give way, or the German will
him not five minutes ago! --then in his old intense whisper -- give way,
his foreign rivals.  The only thing they feared, was, that from being already
his hammock at night in profound darkness --his last drop of Bremen oil being
his lamp-feeder at the other boats.  The ungracious and ungrateful dog!
huge, humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress, as well as
ignorance of the White Whale; immediately turning the conversation to his
laborious; coming forth with a choking sort of gush, and spending itself in
lamp-feeder and oil can, with some remarks touching his having to turn into
name of Jungfrau or the Virgin.  His necessities supplied, Derick departed;
one fish, because not only was he the largest, and therefore the most
seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity, causing the waters
slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.  Now, the
so nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his iron before they could
stomach-ache, I'm afraid.  Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach-ache!
technically called a clean one (that is, an empty one), well deserving the
that this would be the case, and occasionally with a deriding gesture shook
the cause of his devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin.
the pod in advance, seemed questionable; for it is not customary for such
the sea.  Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a
torn shreds, followed by strange subterranean commotions in him, which
valuable whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales were going
venerable leviathans to be at all social.  Nevertheless, he stuck to their
wake, though indeed their back water must have retarded him, because the
white-bone or swell at his broad muzzle was a dashed one, like the swell
wind I ever knew to blow from astern; but look, did ever whale yaw so
with such great velocity, moreover,
with the jaundice, or some other infirmity.  Whether this whale belonged to
wounded arm, cried cruel Flask, pointing to the whale-line near him.  Mind



     With a grating rush, the three lines flew round the loggerheads with such a
     holding on, as it is called; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live
.. <p 354 >
.. <p 355 >
But though boats have been taken down and lost in this way, yet it is this
German's aside with such force, that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer
Hurrah!  this is the way to sail now.  Every keel a sun-beam!  Hurrah! --Here
Nantucket irons entered the whale.  Blinding vapors of foam and white-fire!
The three boats, in the first fury of the whale's headlong rush, bumped the
above-ground, in the air; how vast, then, the burden of a whale, bearing on
afraid, my butter-boxes, cried Stubb, casting a passing glance upon them as
all their dexterous might, they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope
appalling to the wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over
astern --St. Bernard's dogs, you know --relieve distressed travellers.
astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under; even here,
being pitched out too, when you strike a hill.  Hurrah!  this is the way a
best; for it is but reasonable to presume, that the longer the stricken
board.  As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gazing down
board.  Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said -- Canst
darts are counted as stubble; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear!  This
enormous surface of him --in a full grown sperm whale something less than
even with the water, while the three sterns tilted high in the air.  And the
fearful of expending more line, though the position was a little ticklish.
fellow feels when he's going to Davy Jones --all a rush down an endless
flesh from the back; this it is that often torments the Leviathan into soon
force as to gouge deep grooves in them; while so fearful were the
from the Pequod's fish-spears!  In that sloping afternoon sunlight, the
habergeon: he esteemeth iron as straw; the arrow cannot make him flee;
harpooneers that this rapid sounding would soon exhaust the lines, that using
he shot by; ye'll be picked up presently --all right --I saw some sharks
his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean!  It must at least equal the
inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows.  Seems it credible
inclined plane!  Hurrah!  this whale carries the everlasting mail!  But the
into its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of any sort,
landsman would have thought, that beneath all that silence and placidity, the
lead-lined chocks of the boats, whence the three
long enough and broad enough to shade half Xerxes' army.  Who can tell how
mind of fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain --makes the
monster's run was a brief one.  Giving a sudden gasp, he tumultuously sounded.
nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths; what
peril of the thing, it is to be doubted whether this course is always the
rising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes.  Yet not to speak of the
ropes went straight down into the blue --the gunwales of the bows were almost
shadows that the three boats sent down beneath the surface, must have been
should follow the prophets.  For with the strength of a thousand thighs in his
square feet --the pressure of the water is immense.  We all know what an
sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the
tail, Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea, to hide him
that by three such thin threads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big
the creature?  this he?  Oh!  that unfulfilments
thou fill his skin with barbed irons?  or his head with fish-spears?  The
to hold on; till at last --owing to the perpendicular strain from the
twenty line-of-battle ships, with all their guns, and stores, and men on
utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in agony!  Not eight
we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a mad cougar!  This puts me in
weight of fifty atmospheres.  One whaleman has estimated it at the weight of
weight to an eight day clock.  Suspended?  and to what?  To three bits of
were spilled out, and sailed over by the three flying keels.  Don't be
whale soon ceasing to sound, for some time they remained in that attitude,
whale stays under water, the more he is exhausted.  Because, owing to the
wheel-spokes fly, boys, when you fasten to him that way; and there's danger of


     and the ship seemed on the point of going over.  Hold on, hold on, won't
     full of sparks, were given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest.
.. <p 358 >
.. <p 359 >
By thunder, men, we must do something or go for it.  No use prying there;
It might have been darted by some Nor' West Indian long before America was
Sperm Whale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet adequately
Starbuck, who had the ordering of affairs, hung on to it to the last; hung
Whale is far less liable to this accident than any other species.  Where one
With a terrific snap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted, the
accounted for it.  Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with great buoyancy,
after the lapse of many hours or several days, the sunken whale again rises,
and no prominence of any kind to denote their place; therefore, there must
are instances where,
aslant.  To cross to the other side of the deck was like walking up the steep
avast, I say with your handspikes, and run one of ye for a prayer book and a
before described.  But as the stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the
beneath them by the cords.  By very heedful management, when the ship drew
bone in the Right Whale; his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more
brawny, buoyant heroes do sometimes sink.  Be it said, however, that the Sperm
buoyant matter in him.  But it is not so.  For young whales, in the highest
by the stiffest fluke-chains, for it was plain that unless artificially
cabinet there is no telling.  But a sudden stop was put to further
capsized, if still persisting in locking arms with the body; then, when the
carcase sank.  Now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed
command was given to break clear from it, such was the immovable strain upon
dead bodies of captured whales, with the flesh perfectly healed around them,
discovered.  What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous
discoveries, by the ship's being unprecedentedly dragged over sideways to the
flesh perfectly firm about it.  Who had darted that stone lance?  And when?
fluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the timber-heads; and so low had the
flush and May of life, with all their panting lard about them; even these
for the ulceration alluded to.  But still more curious was the fact of a
gabled roof of a house.  The ship groaned and gasped.  Many of the ivory
harpoon was found imbedded in his flesh, on the lower part of the bunch
health, and swelling with noble aspirations, prematurely cut off in the warm
inlayings of her bulwarks and cabins were started from their places, by the
lance-head of stone being found in him, not far from the buried iron, the
might with some reason assert that this sinking is caused by an uncommon
needs have been some other unknown reason in the present case fully to account
nigh, the whale was transferred to her side, and was strongly secured there
of that sort go down, twenty Right Whales do.  This difference in the
on to it so resolutely, indeed, that when at length the ship would have been
pads of lard diminished and all their bones heavy and rheumatic; then you
pen-knife, and cut the big chains.  Knife?  Aye, aye, cried Queequeg, and
sea, owing to the body's immensely increasing tendency to sink.  However,
seizing the carpenter's heavy hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and
species is no doubt imputable in no small degree to the greater quantity of
specific gravity in the fish so sinking, consequent upon this absence of
steel to iron, began slashing at the largest fluke-chains.  But a few strokes,
than a ton; from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free.  But there
the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains and cables were fastened, that it
unnatural dislocation.  In
upheld, the body would at once sink to the bottom.  It so chanced that almost
upon first cutting into him with the spade, the entire length of a corroded
vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon the immovable
was impossible to cast them off.  Meantime everything in the Pequod was
whale now settled that the submerged ends could not be at all approached,
whales that thus sank were old, meagre, and broken-hearted creatures, their
while every moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk,
with its side or belly considerably elevated above the surface.  If the only
ye?  cried Stubb to the body, don't be in such a devil of a hurry to sink!



     Reference was made to
     but the Vedas, or mystical books, whose perusal would seem to have been
     to hold this so-called dragon no other than the great Leviathan himself.  In
.. < chapter lxxxiii 26  JONAH HISTORICALLY REGARDED >
.. <p 362 >
.. <p 362 >
.. <p 363 >
Crockett and Kit Carson --that brawny doer of rejoicing good deeds, was
Hercules and the whale, and Arion and the dolphin;
Hercules, Jonah, and Vishnoo!  there's a member-roll for you!  What club but
Lord; --Vishnoo, who, by the first of his ten earthly incarnations, has for
Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise the whole roll of
Whether to admit Hercules among us or not, concerning this I long remained
a Nantucketer with disdain, since even in our woollen frocks and tarred
actually harpooned his fish, unless, indeed, from the inside.  Nevertheless,
and the whale; and vice versa; certainly they are very similar.  If I claim
and yet their doubting those traditions did not make those traditions one
architects, these Vedas were lying at the bottom of the waters; so Vishnoo
became incarnate in a whale, and sounding down in him to the uttermost
best contradictory authorities, this Grecian story of Hercules and the whale
depths, rescued the sacred volumes.  Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman, then?
dubious: for though according to the Greek mythologies, that antique
even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?  Perseus, St.  George,
ever set apart and sanctified the whale.  When Brahma, or the God of Gods,
fact, placed before the strict and piercing truth, this whole story will
fare like that fish, flesh, and fowl idol of the Philistines, Dagon by name;
for questioning the Hebrew story was this: --He had one of those quaint
from the Shaster, which gives us the dread Vishnoo, one of the three persons
great gods themselves.  That wondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed
have ever had to do with a whale like their great patron), let them never eye
he may be deemed a sort of involuntary whaleman; at any rate the whale caught
him, if he did not the whale.  I claim him for one of our clan.  But, by the
in the godhead of the Hindoos; gives us this divine Vishnoo himself for our
incompatible with the sacred legend and the ancientest draughts of the scene,
indispensable to Vishnoo before beginning the creation, and which therefore
is considered to be derived from the still more ancient Hebrew story of Jonah
must have contained something in the shape of practical hints to young
not the knights of that honorable company (none of whom, I venture to say,
old times, we find the headwaters of our fraternity in nothing short of the
our order.  Our grand master is still to be named; for like royal kings of
out from the orthodox pagans of their times, equally doubted the story of
palms of his hands fell off from him, and only the stump or fishy part of him
periodical dissolutions, he gave birth to Vishnoo, to preside over the work;
remained.  Thus, then, one of our own noble stamp, even a whaleman, is the
saith the Shaster, resolved to recreate the world after one of its
sea-horse; bearing all this in mind, it will not appear altogether
should be enrolled in the most noble order of St.  George.  And therefore, let
some Nantucketers rather distrust this historical story of Jonah and the
swallowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whether that strictly makes a
the animal ridden by St.  George might have been only a large seal, or
the demigod then, why not the prophet?
the historical story of Jonah and the whale in the preceding chapter.  Now
the whaleman's can head off like that?
trowsers we are much better entitled to st.  george's decoration than they.
tutelary guardian of England; and by good rights, we harpooneers of Nantucket
unknown to artists; and considering that as in Perseus' case, St.  George's
whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach; and considering that
whale.  But then there were some sceptical Greeks and Romans, who, standing
whaleman of him, that might be mooted.  It nowhere appears that he ever
whit the less facts, for all that.  One old Sag-Harbor whaleman's chief reason
who being planted before the ark of Israel, his horse's head and both the

     or be content to lose him.  But to haul the boat up to his flank was
.. <p 366 >
.. <p 367 >
As a general thing, therefore, you must first get fast to a whale, before any
Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and Stubb's was foremost.  By great exertion,
Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron; but the stricken whale,
along its length to see if it be exactly straight, Stubb whistlingly gathers
and we'd drink round it!  Yea, verily, hearts alive, we'd brew choice punch
are hostile; that oil is a sliding thing, and that the object in view is to
boat, and one morning not long after the German ship Jungfrau disappeared,
bright steel spans the foaming distance, and quivers in the life spot of the
chin.  Next moment with a rapid, nameless impulse, in a superb lofty arch the
deliberate coolness and equanimity in the direst emergencies, was specially
diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair from the craft's bald keel.  He
exercises boasts nothing like it.  It is only indispensable with an inveterate
fleetness.  Such unintermitted strainings upon the planted iron must sooner or
forty feet ahead.  Handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice or thrice
grasp, leaving the rest unobstructed.  Then holding the lance full before
harpoon as compared with the lance, which in effect become serious drawbacks.
harpoon, and also of a lighter material--pine.  It is furnished with a small
here, that though the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the
his waistband's middle, he levels it at the whale; when, covering him with
impossible, he swam so fast and furious.  What then remained?  Of all the
in the spread of his spout-hole there, and from that live punch-bowl quaff
is repeated, the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in
it remain unwarranted by the event.  Towards noon whales were raised; but so
it, he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand, thereby elevating the
lance, yet it is seldom done; and when done, is still less frequently
later inevitably extract it.  It became imperative to lance the flying whale,
make the boat slide bravely.  Queequeg believed strongly in anointing his
may possibly be of no contemptible advantage; considering that oil and water
must run wine to-day!  Would now, it were old Orleans whiskey, or old Ohio,
old Monongahela!  Then, Tashtego, lad, I'd have ye hold a canakin to the jet,
or twelve feet in length; the staff is much slighter than that of the
or unspeakable
pitchpoling comes into play.  Look now at Stubb; a man who from his humorous,
point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon his palm, fifteen feet in
precipitancy; a disordered flight, as of Cleopatra's barges from Actium.
qualified to excel in pitchpoling.  Look at him; he stands upright in the
rope called a warp, of considerable length, by which it can be hauled back to
running whale; its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distance to which
seemed to be working in obedience to some particular presentiment.  Nor did
skilful leash.  The agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line is
slackened, and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands, and mutely
soon as the ship sailed down to them, they turned and fled with swift
spigot out of him!  cries Stubb. 'Tis July's immortal Fourth; all fountains
subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced, none exceed
successful, on account of the greater weight and inferior length of the
sword, in all its
that fine manoeuvre with the lance called pitchpoling.  Small sword, or broad
the air.  He minds you somewhat of a juggler, balancing a long staff on his
the hand after darting.  But before going further, it is important to mention
the living stuff!  Again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart
the long lance is accurately darted from a violently rocking, jerking boat,
took more than customary pains in that occupation; crawling under its bottom,
tossed bow of the flying boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale is
under extreme headway.  Steel and wood included, the entire spear is some ten
up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as to secure its free end in his
watches the monster die.
whale.  Instead of sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.  That drove the
where it hung over the side, and rubbing in the unctuousness as though
without at all sounding, still continued his horizontal flight, with added
wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand and countless





     and as that long canal --like the grand Erie Canal --is furnished with a sort
     and for several feet laid along, horizontally, just beneath the upper
     or how do you know that they are not those identical drops superficially
     or whether that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken in at the mouth,
     whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapor of the exhaled breath,
.. <p 370 >
.. <p 371 >
But owing to the mystery of the spout --whether it be water or whether it be
Furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his spouting canal,
Oh!  happy that the world is such an excellent listener!  Now, the spouting
accidentally takes in water.  But the Sperm Whale's food is far beneath the
all answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being so clogged
almost stand in it, and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.  The
and discharged through the spiracle.  It is certain that the mouth indirectly
any profound being that had anything to say to this
breathe he must, or die he will.  But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one
canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly intended as it is for the conveyance of air,
central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist enveloping it; and
communicates with the spouting canal; but it cannot be proved that this is
does he want of them?  No roses, no violets, no Cologne-water in the sea.
fathoms beneath the sunlight.  Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as the
for the purpose of discharging water through the spiracle.  Because the
great necessities that strike the victory to thee!  In man, breathing is
greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be, when in feeding he
him very closely, and time him with your watch, you will find that when
his nose.  But then again, what has the whale to say?  Seldom have I known
hook or by net could this vast leviathan be caught, when sailing a thousand
how can you certainly tell whether any water falls from it, when, always,
in a prodigious commotion, the water cascading all around him.  And if at
incessantly going on --one breath only serving for two or three pulsations; so
insult him by saying, that when he so strangely rumbles, he talks through
is, nevertheless, that the Sperm Whale has no proper olfactories.  But what
lodged in the spout-hole fissure, which is countersunk into the summit of the
mixed with water, then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his
much like a gas-pipe laid down in a city on one side of a street.  But the
of locks (that open and shut) for the downward retention of air or the
plain things the knottiest of all.  And as for this whale spout, you might
question returns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe; in other words,
reasoning on the subject?  Speak out!  You have seen him spout; then declare
sea in a calm, with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary's in the
sense of smell seems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that at
seventh or Sunday of his time.  It has been said that the whale only breathes
such times you should think that you really perceived drops of moisture in
surface of his head, and a little to one side; this curious canal is very
surface, and there he cannot spout even if he would.  Besides, if you regard
that whatever other business he has to attend to, waking or sleeping,
the ordinary periods of respiration.  But why pester one with all this
the spout, how do you know that they are not merely condensed from its vapor;
through his spout-hole; if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are
unmolested, there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of his jets and
upward exclusion of water, therefore the whale has no voice; unless you
vapor --no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at on this head.  Sure it
whale's head?  For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day
whale's rising exposes him to all the fatal hazards of the chase.  For not by
what the spout is; can you not tell water from air?  My dear sir, in this
when you are close enough to a whale to get a close view of his spout, he is
with two elements, it could not be expected to have the power of smelling.
world it is not so easy to settle these plain things.  I have ever found your
world, unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting a living.




     Being horizontal in its position, the Leviathan's tail acts in a different
     No ribs of man or boat can withstand it.  Your only salvation lies in eluding
     but it seems to me, that in the whale the sense of touch is concentrated in
     strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.  Third: I cannot demonstrate it,
.. <p 374 >
But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough, the
Third, in sweeping; Fourth, in lobtailing; Fifth, in peaking flukes.  First:
a cracked rib or a dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is
action of sweeping, when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain soft
alternating with the stone in those wonderful relics of the antique, and
and horizontal; those of the middle one, very short, and running crosswise
be in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace.  Therein no
between the outside layers.  This triune structure, as much as anything else,
corpse of Goethe, he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man, that
cripple the graceful flexion of its motions; where infantileness of ease
daintiness of the elephant's trunk.  This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the
especially if it descend to its mark, the stroke is then simply irresistible.
fairy's arm can transcend it.  Five great motions are peculiar to it.  First,
fibres and filaments, which passing on either side the loins and running down
generally the most serious result.  These submerged side blows are so often
harmony, but it often bestows it; and in everything imposingly beautiful,
human form, mark what robustness is there.  And whatever they may reveal of
imparts power to the tail.  To the student of old Roman walls, the middle
in his conflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail.  In
into the flukes, insensibly blend with them, and largely contribute to their
is only inflicted by the recoil.  If it be made in the unobstructed air,
it; but if it comes sideways through the opposing water, then partly owing
layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thin course of tiles always
leaping motion to the monster when furiously swimming.  His side-fins only
manner from the tails of all other sea creatures.  It never wriggles.  In man
might; so that in the tail the confluent measureless force of the whole
or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority.  To the whale, his tail is the
over seem bursting from the marble in the carved Hercules, and its charm
pictures, in which his idea has been most successfully embodied; these
pictures, so destitute as they are of all brawniness, hint nothing of any
power, but the mere negative, feminine one of submission and endurance,
received in the fishery, that they are accounted mere child's play.  Some one
sea; and if he feel but a sailor's whisker, woe to that sailor, whiskers and
seemed as a Roman triumphal arch.  When Angelo paints even God the Father in
serve to steer by.  Second: It is a little significant, that while one sperm
slowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface of the
sole means of propulsion.  Scroll-wise coiled forwards beneath the body, and
strength has much to do with the magic.  Take away the tied tendons that all
striking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and the blow
teachings.  Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of, that
the divine love in the Son, the soft, curled, hermaphroditical Italian
the tail; for in this respect there is a delicacy in it only equalled by the
their most appalling beauty from it.  Real strength never impairs beauty or
then rapidly sprung backwards, it is this which gives that singular darting,
to the light buoyancy of the whaleboat, and the elasticity of its materials,
undulates through a Titanism of power.  On the contrary, those motions derive
were the thing to do it.  Nor does this --its amazing strength, at all tend to
whale only fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless,
whale seems concentrated to a point.  Could annihilation occur to matter, this
when used as a fin for progression; Second, when used as a mace in battle;
whether wielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood it
which on all hands it is conceded, form the peculiar practical virtues of his
which undoubtedly contribute so much to the great strength of the masonry.
whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof of muscular
would be gone.  As devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked



     The long and narrow peninsula of
     With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these straits;
     yet, even at the present day, we occasionally hear of English and American
.. < chapter lxxxvii 6  THE GRAND ARMADA >
.. <p 376n. >
.. <p 377 >
.. <p 378 >
Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Javan sea, and thence, cruising
Australia, and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly
Baltic, and the Propontis.  Unlike the Danes, these Orientals do not demand the
Japan, in time for the great whaling season there.  By these means, the
Java Head; they not a little correspond to the central gateway opening into
Malacca, extending south-eastward from the territories of Birmah, forms the
Surely, he will stop for water.  Nay.  For a long time, now, the circus-running
Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale and the
a season when he might most reasonably be presumed to be haunting it.  But how
and silks, and jewels, and gold, and ivory, with which the thousand islands of
be seen.  But I cannot completely make out his back parts; and hint what he
before the wind, which for centuries past, by night and by day, have passed
between the islands of Sumatra and Java, freighted with the costliest cargoes
bound to China from the west, emerge into the China seas.  Those narrow straits
circumnavigating Pequod would sweep almost all the known Sperm Whale cruising
cruisers, the audacity of these corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed;
domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean, the
elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular the elephant
fiercely demanding tribute at the point of their spears.  Though by the
for the convenience of ships and whales; conspicuous among which are the
giving battle to Moby Dick, in the sea he was most known to frequent; and at
grounds of the world, previous to descending upon the Line in the Pacific;
himself.  So Ahab.  Mark this, too, in the whaler.  While other hulls are
loaded down with alien stuff, to be transferred to foreign wharves; the
most southerly point of all Asia.  In a continuous line from that peninsula
nevertheless, there are not wanting some points of curious similitude; among
no means renounce their claim to more solid tribute.  Time out of mind the
northwards, over waters known to be frequented here and there by the Sperm
now?  in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land?  does his crew drink air?
obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession of ships
of Sumatra, have sallied out upon the vessels sailing through the straits,
of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java; and standing midway in that vast rampart
of islands, buttressed by that bold green promontory, known to seamen as
of the east.  But while they freely waive a ceremonial like this, they do by
others, form a vast mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting Asia with
piratical proas of the Malays, lurking among the low shaded coves and islets
repeated bloody chastisements they have received at the hands of European
some vast walled empire: and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices,
stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does to the elephant;
straits of Sunda and Malacca.  By the straits of Sunda, chiefly, vessels
stream.
stretch the long islands of Sumatra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many
studded oriental archipelagoes.  This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports
sun has raced within his fiery ring, and needs no sustenance but what's in
that oriental sea are enriched, it seems a significant provision of nature,
that such treasures, by the very formation of the land, should at least bear
the appearance, however ineffectual, of being guarded from the all-grasping
these is the spout.  It is well known that the elephant will often draw up
vessels, which, in those waters, have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged.
water or dust in his trunk, and then elevating it, jet it forth in a
western world.  The shores of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those
whale, sweep inshore by the Philippine Islands, and gain the far coast of
where Ahab, though everywhere else foiled in his pursuit, firmly counted upon
will about his face, I say again he has no face.
--though as yet a mile in their rear, --than they rallied again, and forming in
.. <p 381 >
.. <p 382 >
.. <p 383 >
Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck; in his forward turn beholding the monsters he
As if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the Pequod should fairly
Witness, too, all human beings, how when herded together in the sheepfold of
a theatre's pit, they will, at the slightest alarm of fire, rush
ahab quickly revolved in his pivot-hole, crying, aloft there, and rig whips
all herding creatures.  Though banding together in tens of thousands, the
all these conceits had passed through his brain, Ahab's brow was left gaunt
and after several hours' pulling were almost disposed to renounce the chase,
and buckets to wet the sails; --Malays, sir, and after us!
and like King Porus' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander, they
and ribbed, like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has been gnawing
any amazement at the strangely gallied whales before us, for there is no folly
atheistical devils were infernally cheering him on with their curses; --when
boats.  But no sooner did the herd, by some presumed wonderful instinct of
broad waters beyond; then, the harpooneers seemed more to grieve that the
chased, and in the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him; some
close ranks and battalions, so that their spouts all looked like flashing
detached white vapors, rising and falling something like the spouts of the
dropping and dropping the pirates astern, the Pequod at last shot by the
end; and not only that, but a herd of remorseless wild pirates and inhuman
excessive dismay.  But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost
had so victoriously gained upon the Malays.  But still driving on in the wake
have entered the straits, these rascally Asiatics were now in hot pursuit, to
helter-skelter for the outlets, crowding, trampling, jamming, and
hovered, without finally disappearing.  Levelling his glass at this sight,
irregular circles, and aimlessly swimming hither and thither, by their short
irresolution, which, when the fishermen perceive it in the whale, they say he
is gallied.  The compact martial columns in which they had been hitherto
it, without being able to drag the firm thing from its place.  But thoughts
leading wind, was herself in hot chase; how very kind of these tawny
like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; and when, after steadily
lines of stacked bayonets, moved on with redoubled velocity.  Stripped to our
lion-maned buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitary horseman.
make up for their over-cautious delay.  But when the swift Pequod, with a fresh
men.  Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,
mere riding-whips and rowels to her, that they were.  As with glass under arm,
neared them; and the wind now dying away, word was passed to spring to the
of the beasts of the earth which is not infinitely outdone by the madness of
of the watery defile in which the ship was then sailing, and bethought him
of the whales, at length they seemed abating their speed; gradually the ship
paralysed as it were, helplessly floated like water-logged dismantled ships on
philanthropists to assist in speeding her on to her own chosen pursuit, --
rapidly and steadily swimming, were now broken up in one measureless rout;
remorselessly dashing each other to death.  Best, therefore, withhold
seemed going mad with consternation.  In all directions expanding in vast
shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash,
such fancy as the above seemed his.  And when he glanced upon the green walls
swift whales had been gaining upon the ship, than to rejoice that the ship
that through that gate lay the route to his vengeance, and beheld, how that
the Sperm Whale, become notified of the three keels that were after them,
the pasture by three fierce wolves, they could not possibly have evinced such
the sea.  Had these leviathans been but a flock of simple sheep, pursued over
they were now at last under the influence of that strange perplexity of inert
thick spoutings, they plainly betrayed their distraction of panic.  This
through that same gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his deadly
vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra side, emerging at last upon the
was still more strangely evinced by those of their number, who, completely
whales; only they did not so completely come and go; for they constantly
when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave animating token that
yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advanced nor

     till it almost seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them.
.. <p 386 >
.. <p 387 >
But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another and still
One of these little infants, that from certain queer tokens seemed hardly a
Queequeg patted their foreheads; Starbuck scratched their backs with his
and as human infants while suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze away from the
and those that by their enormous girth seemed shortly to become mothers.  The
appearance of a baby's ears newly arrived from foreign parts.  Line!  line!
as, after deep sounding, he floats up again, and shows the slackened curling
backs.  Owing to the density of the crowd of reposing whales, more
becharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at.  Like household dogs
breast, as if leading two different lives at the time; and while yet drawing
calves had been purposely locked up in this innermost fold; and as if the
cause of its stopping; or, possibly, being so young, unsophisticated, and
chase, this natural line, with the maternal end loose, becomes entangled
circles, and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods in any one of
commotion.  And still in the distracted distance we beheld the tumults of the
cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale; him fast!  him fast! --Who line
cried Starbuck.  Look-e here, said Queequeg pointing down.  As when the
day old, might have measured some fourteen feet in length, and some six feet
each, swiftly going round and round, like multiplied spans of horses in a
easily have over-arched the middle ones, and so have gone round on their
escape was at present afforded us.  We must watch for a breach in the living
every way innocent and inexperienced; however it may have been, these
him!  Who struck?  Two whale; one big, one little!  What ails ye, man?
immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd, no possible chance of
in girth.  He was a little frisky; though as yet his body seemed scarce yet
inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolving outer
it.
lake --evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence, or else a still
lake, as I have hinted, was to a considerable depth exceedingly transparent;
lance; but fearful of the consequences, for the time refrained from darting
line buoyantly rising and spiralling towards the air; so now, Starbuck saw
long coils of the umbilical cord of Madame Leviathan, by which the young cub
maternal reticule; where, tail to head, and all ready for the final spring,
might be discovered from our low boat that seemed playing up almost from the
mortal nourishment, be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthly
multitude, must have contained at least two or three square miles.  At any
outer concentric circles, and saw successive pods of whales, eight or ten in
rate --though indeed such a test at such a time might be deceptive --spoutings
recovered from that irksome position it had so lately occupied in the
reminiscence; --even so did the young of these whales seem looking up towards
rim of the horizon.  I mention this circumstance, because, as if the cows and
ring; and so closely shoulder to shoulder, that a Titanic circus-rider might
seemed divulged to us in this enchanted pond.  We saw young Leviathan amours
seemed still tethered to its dam.  Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the
sight.  floating on their sides, the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us.
small tame cows and calves; the women and children of this routed host.  Now,
smaller whales --now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of the
stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side.  For, suspended in
stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hundreds of fathoms of rope;
subtlest secrets of the seas
the palms of his flukes, still freshly retained the plaited crumpled
the unborn whale lies bent like a Tartar's bow.  The delicate side-fins, and
they came snuffling round us, right up to our gunwales, and touching them;
those circles, the entire area at this juncture, embraced by the whole
those watery vaults, floated the forms of the nursing mothers of the whales,
us up.  Keeping at the centre of the lake, we were occasionally visited by
us, but not at us, as if we were but a bit of Gulf-weed in their new-born
wall that hemmed us in; the wall that had only admitted us in order to shut
wide extent of the herd had hitherto prevented them from learning the precise
with the hempen one, so that the cub is thereby trapped.  Some of the



     Gallow the very wanderers of the dark And make them keep their caves.  To
     The previous chapter
.. < chapter lxxxviii 28  SCHOOLS AND SCHOOLMASTERS >
.. <p 382n. >
.. <p 387n. >
.. <p 389 >
.. <p 390 >
English words --the etymological Howards and Percys --are now democratised, nay,
It is an old Saxon word.  It occurs once in Shakespeare: -- The wrathful skies
New-England rocks with the noble brawn of the old English emigrants in the
The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that sagacious saying
The sperm whale, as with all other species of the Leviathan, but unlike
They are comparatively delicate, indeed; I dare say, not to exceed half a
To gally, or gallow, is to frighten excessively --to confound with fright.
You meet them on the Line in time for the full flower of the Equatorial
accompanied by all the solaces and endearments of the harem.  The contrast
almost entirely of females, and those mustering none but young vigorous
always of the largest leviathanic proportions, the ladies, even at full
and which, when additional game is at hand, are inserted upright into the
as must have been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands are
as token of prior possession, should the boats of any other ship draw near.
astern, and likewise to secure one which Flask had killed and waifed.  The
bands are known as schools.  They generally are of two sorts; those composed
between this Ottoman and his concubines is striking; because, while he is
but not old; who, upon any alarm, evinces his gallantry by falling in the
common language, the word is now completely obsolete.  When the polite
contingency provided for in suckling by two teats, curiously situated, one
down as one of the whaleman's self-derived savageries.  Much the same is it
dozen yards round the waist.  Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, that upon the
esteem, the whales salute more hominum.
fashionables, they are for ever on the move in leisurely search of variety.
flight with augmented fleetness.  Further pursuit was useless; but the boats
floating body of a dead whale, both to mark its place on the sea, and also
gave account of an immense body or herd of Sperm Whales, and there was also
growth, are not more than one third of the bulk of an average-sized male.
hunter's lance, the mother's pouring milk and blood rivallingly discolor
in the Fishery, --the more whales the less fish.  Of all the drugged whales
landsman first hears it from the gaunt Nantucketer, he is apt to set it
luxurious Ottoman, swimming about over the watery world, surroundingly
males, or bulls, as they are familiarly designated.  In cavalier attendance
man; it might do well with strawberries.  When overflowing with mutual
most other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons; after a gestation
occasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individuals each.  Such
on each side of the anus; but the breasts themselves extend upwards from
only one was captured.  The rest contrived to escape for the time, but only
plebeianised --so to speak --in the New World.
rear and covering the flight of his ladies.  In truth, this gentleman is a
still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged whales might be dropped
such great bodies are at times encountered, yet,
that.  When by chance these precious parts in a nursing whale are cut by the
the sea for rods.  The milk is very sweet and rich; it has been tasted by
then given the probable cause inducing those vast aggregations.  Now, though
though in some few known instances giving birth to an Esau and Jacob: -- a
time of the Commonwealth.  Thus, some of the best and furthest-descended
to be taken, as will hereafter be seen, by some other craft than the Pequod.
to watch this harem and its lord in their indolent ramblings.  Like
upon the school of females, you invariably see a male of full grown magnitude,
waif is a pennoned pole, two or three of which are carried by every boat;
which may probably be set down at nine months, producing but one at a time;
whole they are hereditarily entitled to en bon point.  It is very curious
with many other sinewy Saxonisms of this sort, which emigrated to


     The allusion to the waifs
.  But
.. < chapter lxxxix 2  FAST-FISH AND LOOSE-FISH >
.. <p 393 >
.. <p 394 >
Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist.  True, among the more upright and honorable
For example, --after a weary and perilous chase and capture of a whale, the
Leviathans, and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter; excepting
Loose-Fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.  But what plays
Meddling with other People's Business.  Yes; these laws might be engraven on a
Pandects and the By-laws of the Chinese Society for the Suppression of
Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislative enactment, was
Queen Anne's farthing, or the barb of a harpoon, and worn round the neck, so
a fish is technically fast when it bears a waif, or any other recognised
a reckless, rollicking rate, that no prudent underwriter would insure them
ability at any time to take it alongside, as well as their intention so to
admirable brevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries to
all controllable by the occupant or occupants, -- a mast, an oar, a nine-inch
and waif-poles in the last chapter but one, necessitates some account of the
any more than he would a riotous lad at Yale or Harvard.  They soon relinquish
be finally killed and captured by another vessel; and herein are indirectly
body may get loose from the ship by reason of a violent storm; and drifting
cable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, it is all the same.  Likewise
chase of a whale in the Northern seas; and when indeed they (the plaintiffs)
companions swim around her with every token of concern, sometimes lingering
comprised many minor contingencies, all partaking of this one grand feature.
comrades quit him.  But strike a member of the harem school, and her
cruising in company, a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and
do.  These are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of the whalemen
expound it.  First: What is a Fast-Fish?  Alive or dead a fish is technically
far away to leeward, be retaken by a second whaler, who, in a calm, snugly
fast, when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by any medium at
fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal gout.  The Forty-barrel-bull
fishermen have been their own legislators and lawyers in this matter.  They
forty-barrel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pugnacious of all
had succeeded in harpooning the fish; they were at last, through peril of
have provided a system which for terse comprehensiveness surpasses Justinian's
laws and regulations of the whale fishery, of which the waif may be deemed
litigated in England, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a hard
of difference between the male and female schools is still more characteristic
of the sexes.  Say you strike a Forty-barrel-bull --poor devil!  all his
outrageous moral injustice for one party to claim possession of a whale
previously chased or killed by another party.  But others are by no means so
schools are larger than the harem schools.  Like a mob of young collegians,
scrupulous.  Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover
separately go about in quest of settlements, that is, harems.  Another point
small are they.  I. A Fast-Fish belongs to the party fast to it.  II.  A
so near her and so long, as themselves to fall a prey.
symbol of possession; so long as the party waifing it plainly evince their
that of Holland.  It was decreed by the States-General in A. D.
the grand symbol and badge.  It frequently happens that when several ships are
the mischief with this masterly code is the
their lives, obliged to forsake not only their lines, but their boat itself.
themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder knocks --the
they are full of fight, fun, and wickedness, tumbling round the world at such
this turbulence though, and when about three fourths grown, break up, and
those wondrous grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met, and these will
though no other nation has ever had any written whaling law, yet the American
tows it alongside, without risk of life or line.  Thus the most vexatious and
violent disputes would often arise between the fishermen, were there not some
whalemen allowances are always made for peculiar cases, where it would be an
written or unwritten, universal, undisputed law applicable to all cases.



     De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat
     Loose-Fish?  What is the principle of religious belief in them but a
     lay before you a circumstance that happened within the last two years.  It
--so truly English --knowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching
.. < chapter xc 2  HEADS OR TAILS >
.. <p 397 >
.. <p 398 >
And what are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?
Cinque Ports are partially or somehow under the jurisdiction of a sort of
Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing and beaching a fine
Greece to the Turk?  What India to England?  What at last will Mexico be to
Harpooneer, must have the head, and the Queen be respectfully presented with
Laws of England, which taken along with the context, means, that of all whales
Liberties of the World but Loose-Fish?  What all men's minds and opinions but
Loose-Fish?  What to the ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of
Lord Warden's.  Upon this the poor mariners in their respectful consternation
captured by anybody on the coast of that land, the King, as Honorary Grand
caput, et regina caudam.  Bracton, l 3.  c. 3.  Latin from the books of the
copy of Blackstone under his arm; and laying it upon the whale's head, he
duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode of getting a
fobbing of them.  Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and
getting nothing at all for our pains but our blisters?  It is his.  Is the
good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of their respective shares;
heart of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone.  At length one of
honest clergyman of the town respectfully addressed a note to his Grace,
in fobbing his perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same
is to this day in force in England; and as it offers in various respects a
it for his royal master and mistress?  What was Poland to the Czar?  What
livelihood?  It is his.  I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by
loose-fish, in which Columbus struck the Spanish standard by way of waifing
part of my share of this whale.  It is his.  Won't the Duke be content
peril, and some expense, and is all that to go to the Duke's benefit; we
policeman or beadle, called a Lord Warden.  Holding the office directly from
precious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with their wives, and
prompts the English railways to be at the expense of a separate car, specially
proof of the fact that the above-mentioned law is still in force, I proceed to
reserved for the accommodation of royalty.  In the first place, in curious
says -- Hands off!  this fish, my masters, is a Fast-Fish.  I seize it as the
seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich, or some one of the
sinecure.  But not so.  Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times
sir, who is the Lord Warden?  The Duke.  But the duke had nothing to do
sold, and his Grace the Duke of Wellington received the money.  Thinking that
some small degree be deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an
strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast and Loose-Fish, it is here
stranger.  But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all soften the hard
territories become by assignment his.  By some writers this office is called a
the United States?  All Loose-Fish.  What are the Rights of Man and the
the crown, I believe, all the royal emoluments incident to the Cinque Port
the tail.  A division which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple;
their fat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good 150 pounds from the
their heads all round;  meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to the
them, after long scratching about for his ideas, made bold to speak.  Please,
there is no intermediate remainder.  Now as this law, under a modified form,
thinkers but Loose-Fish?  What is the great globe itself but a Loose-Fish?
treated of in a separate chapter, on the same courteous principle that
up steps a very learned and most Christian and charitable gentleman, with a
viewed in some particular lights, the case might by a bare possibility in
whale which they had originally descried afar off from the shore.  Now the
with a quarter or a half?  It is his.  In a word, the whale was seized and
with taking this fish?  It is his.  We have been at great trouble, and
with their trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled





     Bouton part of the inscription, yet the word rose, and the bulbous
     Broke it?
     I wish it was broken, or that I didn't have any nose at all!  answered the
     nose in a sort of bag.  What's the matter with your nose, there?  said Stubb.
     them for Sperm Whale spouts; yes, and sometimes sailing from their port with
-- Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy!  are there any of you Bouton-de-Roses that speak
.. <p 402 >
.. <p 403 >
English?  Yes, rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out
Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he was at very much.  But
Nevertheless, in the proper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will
Whale --no.  Very good, then; good bye now, and I'll call again in a
White Whale?  What whale?  The White Whale --a Sperm Whale --Moby Dick,
a jackal for ye!  I well know that these Crappoes of Frenchmen are but poor
again.  Issuing from the cabin, Stubb now called his boat's crew, and pulled
and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.  He now perceived that the Guernsey-man,
become a complete calm; so that whether or no, the Pequod was now fairly
blasted whales in general.  The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger,
but how like all creation it smells!  Now in order to hold direct
by chopping up and trying out these three masts of ours, than he'll get from
communication with the people on deck, he had to pull round the bows to the
condemned cell.  And as for the other whale, why, I'll agree to get more oil
devils in the fishery; sometimes lowering their boats for breakers, mistaking
entrapped in the smell, with no hope of escaping except by its breezing up
ever turn up his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun
fellow, now, he banteringly laughed, standing in the ship's bows, there's
figure-head put together, sufficiently explained the whole to him.  A wooden
folded bulb of a bright red color.  Upon her head boards, in large gilt
foreseeing that all the oil they will get won't be enough to dip the Captain's
hands into a trumpet and shouted -- No, Sir!  No!  Upon which Ahab retired,
have ye seen him?  Never heard of such a whale.  Cachalot Blanche!  White
huge drooping stalk, was painted green, and for thorns had copper spikes
is content too with scraping the dry bones of that other precious fish he has
it.  Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, he bawled
leaning over the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two
letters, he read Bouton de Rose, --Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was
minute.  Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab
off for the stranger.  Drawing across her bow, he perceived that in accordance
our old man has thought of that.  It's worth trying.  Yes, I'm for it; and
present of a little oil for dear charity's sake.  For what oil he'll get from
projecting from it here and there; the whole terminating in a symmetrical
rose-bud, eh?  he cried with his hand to his nose, that will do very well;
so saying he started for the quarter-deck.  By this time the faint air had
something worth a good deal more than oil; yes, ambergris.  I wonder now if
starboard side, and thus come close to the blasted whale; and so talk over
that Stubb vowed he recognized his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines
that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of it, it may contain
that drugged whale there, wouldn't be fit to burn in a jail; no, not in a
that is content with our leavings, the drugged whale there, I mean; aye, and
that were knotted round the tail of one of these whales.  There's a pretty
the likeness of a
the romantic name of this aromatic ship.  Though Stubb did not understand the
their hold full of boxes of tallow candles, and cases of snuffers,
there.  Poor devil!  I say, pass round a hat, some one, and let's make him a
to be the chief-mate.  Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the
what are you holding yours for?  Oh, nothing!  It's a wax nose; I have to
who had just got into the chains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his
wick into; aye, we all know these things; but look ye, here's a Crappo
with the fanciful French taste, the upper part of her stem-piece was carved in


     Now this ambergris is a very curious
     a
--that having a long tow-line in his boat, he would do what he could to help
.. < chapter xcii 31  AMBERGRIS >
.. <p 406 >
.. <p 406 >
.. <p 407 >
Captain Coffin was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons on that
I must go.  He says, Monsieur, that his principles won't admit of his
Monsieur had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these
Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam.  His boat's crew were all
against my principles to drink with the man I've diddled.  In fact, tell him
all blending with it for a time.  I have it, I have it, cried Stubb, with
almost have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea; and when at
ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist.  Some six handfuls
and hailing the pequod to give notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to
benevolently towed away at his whale the other way, ostentatiously slacking
by it, as one river will flow into and then along with another, without at
bye.
certain Nantucket-born
commenced an excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin.  You would
cutting-tackles, and at once cast loose the cables and chains confining the
delight, striking something in the subterranean regions, a purse!  a
disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegay increased, when suddenly
drinking; but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then
feigned to cast off from the whale; hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon
forward, and in a loud voice commanded his crew to desist from hoisting the
from out the very heart of this plague, there stole a faint stream of
gold-hunters.  And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, and
his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.  He wants you to take a glass of wine
in high excitement, eagerly helping their chief, and looking as anxious as
increased his distance, while the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb's
it is of a hue between yellow and ash color.  And this, good friends, is
learned.  Though the word ambergris is but the French compound for grey amber,
length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was like turning up old
more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, Monsieur, he conjures us, as we
of something that looked like ripe Windsor soap, or rich mottled old cheese;
out a most unusually long tow-line.  Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb
parties (meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting Stubb down into
perfume, which flowed through the tide of bad smells without being absorbed
perhaps, might have been secured were it not for impatient Ahab's loud command
precise origin of ambergris remained, like amber itself, a problem to the
purse!  Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfuls
reap the fruit of his unrighteous cunning.  Seizing his sharp boat-spade, he
returned to them.  Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that --
screaming, and yelling, and fighting around them.  Stubb was beginning to look
service to us.  Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful
side, and getting into his boat, hailed the Guernsey-man to this effect,
somebody else.  He says, Monsieur, that he's very happy to have been of any
subject.  for at that time, and indeed until a comparatively late day, the
substance, and so important as an article of commerce, that in
that --in fact, tell him I've diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhaps
the Frenchman's boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship one way, Stubb
them, by pulling out the lighter whale of the two from the ship's side.  While
to Stubb to desist, and come on board, else the ship would bid them good
value our lives, to cut loose from these fish.  Instantly the captain ran
very unctuous and savory withal.  You might easily dent it with your thumb;
were obtained; but more was unavoidably lost in the sea, and still more,
whale.  Whereupon Stubb quickly pulled to the floating body,
whales to the ship.  What now?  said the Guernsey-man, when the captain had
whales, for it's so calm they won't drift.  By this time Stubb was over the
with him, said the interpreter.  Thank him heartily; but tell him it's

     It was but some few days after
.. < chapter xciii 15  THE CASTAWAY >
.. <p 409 >
.. <p 410 >
.. <p 411 >
Connecticut, he had once enlivened many a fiddler's frolic on the green; and
In outer aspect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black pony and a
Pequod with the little negro Pippin by nick-name, Pip by abbreviation.  Poor
Pip loved life, and all life's peaceable securities; so that the
Pip!  ye have heard of him before; ye must remember his tambourine on that
Some few hands are reserved called ship-keepers, whose province it is to work
against a blue-veined neck, the pure-watered diamond drop will healthful
ambergris affair Stubb's after-oarsman chanced so to sprain his hand, as
any other race.  For blacks, the year's calendar should show naught but three
at melodious even-tide, with his gay ha-ha!  had turned the round horizon into
be luridly illumined by strange wild fires, that fictitiously showed him off
but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale; and
divinest symbol of the crystal skies, looks like some crown-jewel stolen from
dramatic midnight, so gloomy-jolly.
eccentric span.  But while hapless Dough-Boy was by nature dull and torpid in
effulgences, infernally superb; then the evil-blazing diamond, once the
encountering the Frenchman, that a most significant event befell the most
ended in providing the sometimes madly merry and predestinated craft with a
entrapped, had most sadly blurred his brightness; though, as ere long will be
find it needful.  Now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the
for a time to become quite maimed; and, temporarily, Pip was put into his
glow; yet, when the cunning jeweller would show you the diamond in its most
her own.  Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
his intellects, Pip, though over tender-hearted, was at bottom very bright,
hundred and sixty-five Fourth of Julys and New Year's Days.  Nor smile so,
if there happen to be an unduly slender, clumsy, or timorous wight in the
impressive lustre, he lays it against a gloomy ground, and then lights it
indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant, when, as a general
insignificant of the Pequod's crew; an event most lamentable; and which
its brilliancy; behold yon lustrous ebony, panelled in king's cabinets.  But
living and ever accompanying prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove
motion of a Sperm Whale's flukes above water dispenses a perfume, as when a
musk-scented lady rustles her dress in a warm parlor.  What then shall I liken
of doors; though, it is true, seldom in the open air.  I say, that the
one star-belled tambourine.  So, though in the clear air of day, suspended
panic-striking business in which he had somehow unaccountably become
place.  The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervousness;
seen, what was thus temporarily subdued in him, in the end was destined to
ship, that wight is certain to be made a ship-keeper.  It was so in the
ship-keepers are as hardy fellows as the men comprising the boats' crews.  But
the King of Hell.  But let us to the story.  It came to pass, that in the
the Sperm Whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude?  Must it not be
the middle ages affected to detect a Jew in the company, by the nose.  Nor
the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale.  As a general thing, these
therefore came off not altogether discreditably; though Stubb observing him,
thing, he enjoys such high health; taking abundance of exercise; always out
to exhort him to cherish his courageousness to the utmost, for he might often
to ten times the natural lustre with which in his native Tolland County in
to that famous elephant, with jewelled tusks, and redolent with myrrh, which
took care, afterwards,
up, not by the sun, but by some unnatural gases.  Then come out those fiery
was led out of an Indian town to do honor to Alexander the Great?
whale; and as the fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap,
which ever enjoy all holidays and festivities with finer, freer relish than
which happened, in this instance, to be right under poor Pip's seat.  The
while I write that this little black was brilliant, for even blackness has
white one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar color, driven in one
with that pleasant, genial, jolly brightness peculiar to his tribe; a tribe,




     That whale of Stubb's so dearly
     broke to my fingers, and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe
     that at last I was continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into
     the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or Case.  While some were occupied with
.. < chapter xciv 26  A SQUEEZE OF THE HAND >
.. <p 413 >
.. <p 414 >
.. <p 415 >
I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of
I sat down before a large Constantine's bath of it, I found it strangely
Pip's ringed horizon began to expand around him miserably.  By the merest
Squeeze!  squeeze!  squeeze!  all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till
Such a clearer!  such a sweetener!  such a softener!  such a delicious
an abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget;
and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised, indifferent as his God.  For the
at last to that celestial thought, which, to reason, is absurd and frantic;
befell myself.
before his passive eyes; and the miser-merman, Wisdom, revealed his hoarded
began to credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue
chance the ship itself at last rescued him; but from that hour the little
co-laborers' hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules.  Such
concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in the liquid part.  It
depths, where strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to and fro
duty!  no wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favorite cosmetic.
felt like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralize.  As I sat
free from all ill-will, or petulence, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.
gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands among those soft, gentle
globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost within the hour; as they richly
grapes their wine; as I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma, --literally and
had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with several others,
heaps; and among the joyous, heartless, ever-juvenile eternities, Pip saw the
hoisting operations previously detailed, were regularly gone through, even to
ill-humor or envy!  Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all
in allaying the heat of anger: while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely
in the sequel of the narrative, it will then be seen what like abandonment
insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my
insanity is heaven's sense; and wandering from all mortal reason, man comes
into each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very milk and
loom, and spoke it; and therefore his shipmates called him mad.  So man's
mollifier!  After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers
multitudinous, God-omnipresent, coral insects, that out of the firmament of
negro went about the deck an idiot; such, at least, they said he was.  The
purchased, was duly brought to the Pequod's side, where all those cutting and
rest, blame not Stubb too hardly.  The thing is common in that fishery; and
sea had jeeringly kept his finite body up, but drowned the infinite of his
should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest
soon as filled with the sperm; and when the proper time arrived, this same
soul.  Not drowned entirely, though.  Rather carried down alive to wondrous
sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to the try-works, of which anon.  It
squeeze ourselves
that inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost
their eyes sentimentally; as much as to say, --Oh!  my dear fellow beings, why
there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter exertion at the
this latter duty, others were employed in dragging away the larger tubs, so
time I lived as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in
truly, like the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the
was now so far away, and he and all his crew so intent upon his fish, that
was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid.  A sweet and unctuous
waters heaved the colossal orbs.  He saw God's foot upon the treadle of the
windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under indolent sail, and




     Besides her hoisted boats, an American
     Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a
     occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a candidate for
     oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably increased, besides
.. < chapter xcv 6  THE CASSOCK >
.. < chapter xcvi 17  THE TRY-WORKS >
.. <p 417 >
.. <p 417 >
.. <p 418 >
.. <p 418 >
.. <p 418n. >
Bible leaves!  Bible leaves!  This is the invariable cry from the mates to
If he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants', would you be
Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone will adequately protect
Kedron, as darkly set forth in the 15th chapter of the first book of Kings.
Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assisted by
Maachah in Judea; and for worshipping which, king Asa, her son, did depose
a dead comrade from the field.  extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now
an archbishoprick, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!
anomaly of the most solid masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting
arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it.  The
as half a glimpse of that unaccountable cone, -- longer than a Kentuckian is
brick and mortar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height.  The
bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the minced pieces
certain juncture of this post-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled
cistern in the whale's huge head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw;
consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots; an operation
drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator's desk.  Arrayed in decent black;
forward nigh the windlass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with
foundation does not penetrate the deck, but the masonry is firmly secured to
gives it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at last
hangs it, well spread, in the
he stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge.
her, and destroyed the idol, and burnt it for an abomination at the brook
him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his office.  That office
idol of Queequeg.  And an idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its
likeness was.  Such an idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen
main-mast, the most roomy part of the deck.  The timbers beneath are of a
mincer now stands before you invested in the full canonicals of his calling.
no small curiosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would have
not the miracle of his symmetrical tail; none of these would so surprise you,
of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then cutting two slits for
peculiar strength, fitted to sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of
pelt of a boa.  This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg;
perhaps improving it in quality.
proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the
rigging, to dry.  Ere long, it is taken down; when removing some three feet
seen there, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers.  Not the wondrous
sharp as hone can make it; the spademan's feet are shoeless; the thing
slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the
tall, nigh a foot in diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony
the completed ship.  it is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were
the mincer.  It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as thin
the surface by
transported to her planks.  The try-works are planted between the foremast and
two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it, and
very much astonished?  Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.
whaler is outwardly distinguished by her try-works.  She presents the curious
which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, planted endwise against the
with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying




     back, just in time to prevent the vessel from flying up into the wind, and
     the morn will show in far other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious,
     though it seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the
     yet steadfastly shot her red hell further and further into the blackness of
.. <p 421 >
.. <p 422 >
But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable)
I.  Lo!  in my brief sleep I had turned myself about, and was fronting the
Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of griefs beneath the
Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon's, and Ecclesiastes is the
Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness myself, I but the better saw the
and for long hours silently guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea.
and jails, and walks fast crossing grave-yards, and would rather talk of
and viciously spat round her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted
and which is two thirds of this earth.  So, therefore, that mortal man who
apart.  But, spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by;
bewildered feeling, as of death, came over me.  Convulsively my hands grasped
bound to any haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern.  A stark,
brought by the lee!  look not too long in the face of the fire, O man!  Never
conscious of something fatally wrong.  The jaw-bone tiller smote my side,
dream with thy hand on the helm!  Turn not thy back to the compass; accept
fiend shapes before me, capering half in smoke and half in fire, these at
fine hammered steel of woe.  All is vanity.  ALL.  This wilful world hath
gloom, now and then made ghastly by flashes of redness.  Uppermost was the
golden, glad sun, the only true lamp --all others but liars!  Nevertheless the
harpooneers wildly gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as
hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be true --not true,
impression, that whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much
in some enchanted way, inverted.  My God!  what is the matter with me?  thought
its redness makes all things look ghastly.  To-morrow, in the natural sun,
last begat kindred visions in my soul, so soon as I began to yield to that
like the flames from the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the
monomaniac commander's soul.  So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm,
moon.  The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side of this earth,
narrated to each other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in
not got hold of unchristian Solomon's wisdom yet.  But he who dodges hospitals
operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of
or undeveloped.  With books the same.  The truest of all men was the Man of
putting my fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further
redness, the madness, the ghastliness of others.  The continual sight of the
revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works.  As they
ship's stern, with my back to her prow and the compass.  In an instant I faced
sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
steady binnacle lamp illuminating it.  Nothing seemed before me but a jet
sun hides not Virginia's Dismal Swamp, nor Rome's accursed Campagna, nor wide
that blackness of darkness, seemed the material counterpart of her
the contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely
the first hint of the hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when
the sea and the night, and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth,
the skies will be bright; those who glared like devils in the forking flames,
the tiller, but with the crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow,
the wind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and
thing occurred to me.  Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was horribly
to shake in the wind; I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of
unaccountable drowsiness which ever would come over me at a midnight helm.
unnatural hallucination of the night, and the fatal contingency of being
very probably capsizing her.  How glad and how grateful the relief from this
which leaned against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning
with savages, and laden with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into
words of mirth; as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them,



     Ere now it has been related how Ahab was
     oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short of audacity.  They know not the
     rowing on the Line, --they only step to the deck to carry vast chains, and
.. < chapter xcix 30  THE DOUBLOON >
.. <p 425 >
.. <p 426 >
.. <p 426 >
Greece, two thousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I
Oh!  my friends, but this is man-killing!  Yet this is life.  For hardly have
One day the planks stream with freshets of blood and oil; on the sacred
along the bulwarks, and with buckets of water and rags restore them to their
and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out the daintiest Holland.  Now,
away we sail to fight some other world, and go through young life's old
away.  The great hatch is scrubbed and placed upon the try-works, completely
besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about suffused with unctuousness;
clinging to the side, that ley quickly exterminates it.  Hands go diligently
concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to their own ablutions; shift
deafening.  But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears
deck; think of having hangings to the top; object not to taking tea by
defilements, and learned to live here in clean tabernacles of the soul;
discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics; propose to mat the
finally bestirred themselves to cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy
from the ashes of the burned scraps of the whale, a potent ley is readily
full tidiness.  The soot is brushed from the lower rigging.  All the numerous
hardly is this done, when -- There she blows! --the ghost is spouted up, and
heave the heavy windlass, and cut and slash, yea, and in their very
hiding the pots; every cask is out of sight; all tackles are coiled in
hours; when from the boat, where they have swelled their wrists with all day
implements which have been in use are likewise faithfully cleansed and put
in this self-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and
labors, which know no night; continuing straight through for ninety-six
made; and whenever any adhesiveness from the back of the whale remains
men intent on spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again
moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle.  To hint to such musked mariners of
never look so white as just after what they call an affair of oil.  Besides,
perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in all the business of whaling.
possesses a singularly cleansing virtue.  This is the reason why the decks
quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale's head are profanely piled; great
room of it; many is the time the poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of
routine again.  Oh!  the metempsychosis!  Oh!  Pythagoras, that in bright
rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke from the try-works has
sailed with thee along the Peruvian coast last voyage -- and, foolish as I am,
soil the old oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot
somewhere.  Yes; and many is the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted
sun and the equatorial try-works; when, on the heel of all this, they have
sweatings to be smoked and burned anew by the combined fires of the equatorial
taught thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!
the entire ship seems great leviathan himself; while on all hands the din is
the entire ship's company, the whole of this conscientious duty is at last
their clean frocks, are startled by the cry of There she blows!  and away
themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to the immaculate deck, fresh
there, at the three mast heads, stand three
they fly to fight another whale, and go through the whole weary thing again.
thing you distantly allude to.  Away, and bring us napkins!  But mark: aloft
try-works, you would all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel,
unseen nooks; and when by the combined and simultaneous industry of almost
valuable sperm; and then, with weary patience, cleansed ourselves from its
we mortals by long toilings extracted from the world's vast bulk its small but
with a most scrupulously neat commander.  The unmanufactured sperm oil
with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and humorously
wont to pace his quarter-deck, taking regular turns at either limit, the





     To begin: there's Aries, or the Ram --lecherous dog, he begets us; then,
     here they are --here they go --all alive: --Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the
     that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue, when lo!  comes Cancer
     the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer.  Yet, oh, the great sun
     weighed and found wanting; and while we are very sad about that, Lord!  how
.. <p 429 >
.. <p 430 >
Archer, is amusing himself.  As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside; here's
Bull and Jimimi!  here's Gemini himself, or the Twins.  Well; the sun he
Epitome calls the zodiac, and what my almanack below calls ditto.  I'll get
Hook, I'd not look at it very long ere spending it.  Humph!  in my poor,
Lion, lies in the path --he gives a few fierce bites and surly dabs with his
Popayan; with plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes,
Stubb.  Oh, jolly's the word for aye!  Adieu, Doubloon!  But stop; here comes
Taurus, or the Bull --he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins --
aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow here, does jolly
and quarter joes.  what then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator
and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes Libra, or the Scales --happiness
arithmetic, I'll try my hand at raising a meaning out of these queer
at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer's
bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil; but if we lift them,
between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.  Book!  you lie there; the
but still sadly to me.  I will quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely.  There
calendar, and Bowditch's navigator, and Daboll's arithmetic go.  Signs and
chapter; and now I'll read it off, straight out of the book.  Come, Almanack!
curing the wound, when whang come the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the
curvicues here with the Massachusetts calendar.  Here's the book.  Let's see
earthly symbol.  So in this vale of Death, God girds us round; and over all
fact is, you books must know your
from him, we gaze for him in vain!  This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly,
headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the Water-bearer, pours out his
here's signs and wonders truly!  That, now, is what old Bowditch in his
insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer.  I have seen doubloons before
inspectingly.  He goes below; let me read.  A dark valley between three
is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fain snatch some sweet solace
it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and hearty.  Jollily he,
it!  Look you, Doubloon, your zodiac here is the life of man in one round
it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with faces which I
man seems to read Belshazzar's awful writing.  I have never marked the coin
mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the Trinity, in some faint
now in my voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru,
now's the old Mogul, soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, he's been twigging
now.  Signs and wonders; and the sun, he's always among 'em.  Hem, hem, hem;
our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon and a hope.  If we
paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin!  that's our first love; we marry
places.  You'll do to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to
should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long.  And all from looking
sleep.  There's a sermon now, writ in high heaven, and the sun goes through
supply the thoughts.  That's my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts
that is so killing wonderful?  By Golconda!  let me read it once.  Halloa!
the Crab, and drags us back; and here, going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring
the almanack and as I have heard devils can be raised with Daboll's
the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comes rushing, and
we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the Scorpion, stings us in rear; we are
wheels among 'em.  Aye, here on the coin he's just crossing the threshold
whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with Pisces, or the Fishes, we
wonders!  There's a clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist--hark!  By Jove, I have
wonders, eh?  Pity if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in
your doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of




    
     ENDERBY, OF LONDON Ship, ahoy!  Hast seen the White Whale?  So cried Ahab,
--avast heaving there!  Jump, boys, and swing over the cutting-tackle.  As
.. < chapter c 2  LEG AND ARM THE PEQUOD, OF NANTUCKET, MEETS THE SAMUEL >
.. <p 433 >
.. <p 434 >
Ahab.  And in the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight of
But here a curious difficulty presented itself.  In the excitement of the
a huzzar's surcoat.  Hast seen the White Whale?  See you this?  and
a spacious roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth;
almost hourly used to it, like whalemen --to clamber up a ship's side from a
an ingenious and very handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod,
anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving the word, held
and a thing not to be rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment's
and one empty arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of
arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, Aye, aye,
bannisters.  But this awkwardness only lasted a minute, because the strange
blackberrying.  Cook!  ho, cook!  and cook us!  Jenny!  hey, hey, hey, hey,
blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end.  This was
boat on the open sea; for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards
burly, good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in
capstan head.  With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood, cried out, I see, I see!
cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near him -- Stand by to
did it get there?  And so they'll say in the resurrection, when they come to
every little untoward circumstance that befel him, and which indirectly
fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it, with bedded oysters
for the shaggy bark.  Oh, the gold!  the precious, precious gold! --the green
good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
he could hardly hope to attain.  It has before been hinted, perhaps, that
hearty!  let us shake bones together! --an arm and a leg! --an arm that never
hey, Jenny, Jenny!  and get your hoe-cake done!
himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight, by
his crew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger.
lower!  In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and
miser 'll hoard ye soon!  Hish!  hish!  God goes 'mong the worlds
moment, Ahab had forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once
of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did not seem to bethink
once more hailing a ship showing English colors, bearing down under the
perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards him a pair
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curved
pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle.  Soon he
quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain, who
quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid his solitary
so, deprived of one leg, and the strange ship of course being altogether
sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head like a mallet.  Man my boat!
sprang from his luckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated
stepped on board of any vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by
stern.  Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his hoisted
the bulwarks, and then instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson.
the two officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by the
them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple to use their sea
thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in the fluke of an
to a clumsy landsman again; hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height
unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced
warning.  Now, it is no very easy matter for anybody --except those who are
was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the
was carelessly reclining in his own boat's bow.  He was a darkly-tanned,
withdrawing it from the fold that had hidden it, he held up a white arm of





     Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till he couldn't see to put on
     Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing hot
     clever things of that sort.  But I may as well say --en passant, as the French
     give him your left arm for bait to get the right.  Do you know, gentlemen
     or any token of ever having been a wound -- Well, the captain there will tell
--as some call him --and then I knew it was he.  Did'st thou cross his wake
--very gravely and mathematically bowing to each Captain in succession -- Do
.. <p 437 >
.. <p 438 >
Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh out!  why don't ye?  You know you're a
But I had no hand in shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all
Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy-- Samuel Enderby is the name of
Captain Boomer's facetious interruption, that spite of my best and severest
Dick doesn't bite so much as he swallows.  Well, then, interrupted Bunger,
Englishmen.  Oh!  cried the one-armed captain, Oh, yes!  Well; after he
I didn't then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick, till
I may as well, said the surgeon, coolly.  I was about observing, sir, before
a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the two crippled captains.  But, at his
a shocking bad wound, began the whale-surgeon; and, taking my advice,
again?  Twice.  But could not fasten?  Didn't want to try to: ain't one
ages, you rascal.  What became of the White Whale?  now cried Ahab, who
bowl-like cavity in his skull, but which bore not the slightest scarry trace,
captain; he never drinks it; it's a sort of fits to him; fresh water
clergy --am a strict total abstinence man; I never drink-- Water!  cried the
dent, sir --removing his hat, and brushing aside his hair, and exposing a
die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future
endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse; the truth was, sir, it
him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet-- Oh, very
him to completely digest even a
his mother did; he was born with it.  Oh, you solemn rogue, you --you Bunger!
in my diet.  Oh!  a great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr.
inches long.  I measured it with the lead line.  In short, it grew black; I
inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is quite impossible for
knew what was threatened, and off it came.
limb enough?  What should I do without this other arm?  And I'm thinking Moby
mine once.  He flies into diabolical passions sometimes.  Do ye see this
my ship, interrupted the one-armed captain, addressing Ahab; go on, boy.
not mine; he ordered the carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there
perceived, respected sir --said the imperturbable godly-looking Bunger,
politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain's bidding.  It was
precious jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I'd rather be killed by you
put to the end, to knock some one's brains out with, I suppose, as he tried
remark --that I myself --that is to say, Jack Bunger, late of the reverend
rule --pointing at it with the marlingspike -- that is the captain's work,
severe!  chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly altering his voice,
slightly bowing to Ahab -- is apt to be facetious at times; he spins us many
some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heard about Moby Dick
sounded, we didn't see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted,
superior's introduction of him to Ahab, he
than kept alive by any other man.  My captain, you must have ere this
the bandages; and sending me to bed, half seas over, about three o'clock in
the morning.  Oh, ye stars!  he sat up with me indeed, and was very severe
throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on --go on with the arm story.  Yes,
thus far had been impatiently listening to this bye-play between the two
was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and several
was there ever such another Bunger in the watery world?  Bunger, when you
weather there on the Line.  But it was no use --I did all I could; sat up with
you how that came here; he knows.  No, I don't, said the captain, but
you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of the whale are so

     Syren --made a noble experimental cruise; and it was thus that the great
, the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own, to go on
--not all though --were such famous, hospitable ships; that passed round the
.. <p 442 >
.. <p 443 >
Commanded by a naval Post-Captain, the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it,
Enderby was a jolly ship; of good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong;
Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known.  The Syren in this
Pacific were thrown open.  But not content with this good deed, the
The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders, Zealanders,
a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan.  That ship --well called the
and Danes; from whom they derived many terms still extant in the fishery;
and bye we scrambled down, so sober, that we had to pass the flip again,
and did some service; how much does not appear.  But this is not all.  In 0084
and what is yet more, their fat old fashions, touching plenty to eat and
beef, and the bread, and the can, and the joke; and were not soon weary
been at all sparing of historical whale research, when it has seemed needed.
besides, it was an anti-scorbutic; in short, the bread contained the only
boarded her once at midnight somewhere off the Patagonian coast, and drank
body in it.  They said it was bull-beef; others, that it was dromedary beef;
bowlines; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets into
but i do not know, for certain, how that was.  they had dumplings too; small,
but not so the English whaler.  Hence, in the English, this thing of whaling
but substantial, symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings.  I
cheer of these English whalers is matter for historical research.  Nor have I
crack fellows all, and capital from boot heels to hat-band.  But why was it,
drink.  For, as a general thing, the English merchant-ship scrimps her crew;
easy to step over into a dark corner when you ate it.  But all in all, taking
example to all drunken tars.  However, the masts did not go overboard; and by
famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin, a Nantucketer.  All honor to
fancied that you could feel them, and roll them about in you after they were
fresh fare they had.  But the forecastle was not very light, and it was very
full of the precious sperm, the Amelia's example was soon followed by other
good cheer is not normal and natural, but incidental and particular; and,
good flip down in the forecastle.  It was a fine gam we had, and they were all
her from truck to helm, considering the dimensions of the cook's boilers,
his ivory heel -- it minds me of the noble, solid, Saxon hospitality of that
including his own live parchment boilers; fore and aft, I say, the Samuel
indefatigable house again bestirred itself: Samuel and all his Sons --how
many, their mother only knows --and under their immediate auspices, and
much diluted and pickled it to my taste.  The beef was fine --tough, but with
of eating, and drinking, and laughing?  I will tell you.  The abounding good
of the honor, being a very fast sailer and a noble craft every way.  I
out of you like billiard-balls.  The bread --but that couldn't be helped;
partly, I think, at their expense, the British government was induced to send
rate of ten gallons the hour; and when the squall came (for it's squally off
ship; and may my parson forget me, and the devil remember me, if I ever lose
ships, English and American, and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the
sight of it.  Flip?  Did I say we had flip?  Yes, and we flipped it at the
swallowed.  If you stooped over too far forward, you risked their pitching
that fine gam I had --long, very long after old Ahab touched her planks with
the Enderbies, therefore, whose house, I think, exists to the present day;
the great South Sea of the other world.  The ship named after him was worthy
the sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in the howling gale, a warning
the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South Sea.
there by Patagonia), and all hands --visitors and all --were called to reef
therefore, must have some special origin,
think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some other English whalers I know of
though doubtless the original Samuel must long ago have slipped his cable for
though the savage salt spray bursting down the forecastle scuttle, rather too
topsails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloft in
trumps --every soul on board.  A short life to them, and a jolly death.  And
voyage was a skilful and lucky one; and returning to her berth with her hold



     Think you I let that chance go, without using my boat-hatchet and
     float from forth the loom; the freshet-rushing carpet for ever slides away.
     wonderful devices, chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles,
.. <p 446 >
.. <p 447 >
And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their gigantic,
Can you land a full-grown whale on your deck for examination, as a cook
Glen; the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap; the
Ishmael; but have a care how you seize the privilege of Jonah alone; the
The weaver-god, he weaves; and by that weaving is he deafened, that he hears
Tranque, years ago, when attached to the trading-ship Dey of Algiers, I was
When the vast body had at last been stripped of its fathom-deep enfoldings,
all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; the message-carrying air; all
among these latter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after an unusually long
an opportunity to dissect him in miniature.  In a ship I belonged to, a small
and the bones become dust dry in the sun, then the skeleton was carefully
aromatic canoes; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders,
behoves me now to unbutton him still further, and untagging the points of his
belike of the tallow-vats, dairy-rooms, butteries, and cheeseries in his
beneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, I have been blessed with
bowels.  I confess, that since Jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very far
capstan, deliver lectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea; and by help of the
cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted droopings seemed his verdant jet.
cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for his poke or bag, to
cub?
damocles.  it was a wondrous sight.  the wood was green as mosses of the icy
dishes a roast-pig?  Surely not.  A veritable witness have you hitherto been,
forth its vapory spout; while, suspended from a bough, the terrific lower jaw
full grown development, for that rare knowledge I am indebted to my late
hand! -- but one single word with thee!  Nay --the shuttle flies --the figures
his retired palm villa at Pupella; a sea-side glen not very far distant from
hose, unbuckling his garters, and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of
industrious earth beneath was as a weaver's loom, with a gorgeous carpet on
invited to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque, at
is to say, in his unconditional skeleton.  But how now, Ishmael?  How is it,
it deck?  wherefore all these ceaseless toilings?  Speak, weaver! --stay thy
it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and woof, and the
jack-knife, and breaking the seal and reading all the contents of that young
kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystic head again sent
living flowers the figures.  All the trees, with all their laden branches;
make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons, and for the heads of the lances.
matters of barbaric vertu, had brought together in Pupella whatever rare
privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams; the rafters, ridge-pole,
qualities, my royal friend Tranquo, being gifted with a devout love for all
raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, with his head against a
royal friend Tranquo, king of Tranque, one of the Arsacides.  For being at
sheltered it.  The ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebrae were carved
sleepers, and under-pinnings, making up the frame-work of leviathan; and
subterranean parts of the whale?  Did erudite Stubb, mounted upon your
sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving the unwearied verdure.  Oh, busy weaver!
that you, a mere oarsman in the fishery, pretend to know aught about the
the joints of his innermost bones, set him before you in his ultimatum; that
the wonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.  Chief
these unceasingly were active.  Through the lacings of the leaves, the great
things the more ingenious of his people could invent; chiefly carved woods of
transported up the Pupella glen, where a grand temple of lordly palms now
unseen weaver! --pause! --one word! -- whither flows the fabric?  what palace may
vibrated over all the devotees, like the hair-hung sword that so affrighted
what our sailors called Bamboo-Town, his capital.  Among many other fine
windlass, hold up a specimen rib for exhibition?  Explain thyself, Ishmael.
with Arsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull, the priests




     In the first
     flukes, an utter blank!  How vain and foolish, then, thought I, for timid
     so variously repeated in this book, that the skeleton of the whale is by no
     which measured eight feet and some inches.  From that part, the remaining
.. < chapter ciii 10  MEASUREMENT OF THE WHALE'S SKELETON >
.. <p 450 >
.. <p 451 >
Attached to this back-bone, for something less than a third of its length,
I shall now simply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of
Such a statement may prove useful here.  According to a careful calculation I
according to my careful calculation, I say, a Sperm Whale of the largest
are used for beams whereon to lay foot-path bridges over small streams.  In
away from it in a straight line, not a little resembled the hull of a great
cattle, should be put to this leviathan, to make him at all budge to any
compared with the living body.  Of this seventy-two feet, his skull and jaw
comprised some twenty feet, leaving some fifty feet of plain back-bone.
considerably outweigh the combined population of a whole village of one
considering these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with the circumstance,
few disordered joints; and in place of the weighty and majestic, but boneless
gain a complete notion of the general structure we are about to view.  In
have made, and which I partly base upon Captain Scoresby's estimate, of
his unobstructed bones.  But as the colossal skull embraces so very large a
in depth.  Now, the greatest depth of the invested body of this particular
inches.  In general thickness, they all bore a seemly correspondence to their
inserted, and the keel is otherwise, for the time, but a long, disconnected
is to be repeated concerning it in this chapter, you must not fail to carry
it in your mind, or under your arm, as we proceed, otherwise you will not
landsman's imagination?  Having already in various ways put before you his
least ninety tons; so that reckoning thirteen men to a ton, he would
length, the Sperm Whale's skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-two feet; so
length.  The middle ribs were the most arched.  In some of the Arsacides they
living bulk of this leviathan, whose skeleton we are briefly to exhibit.
long; for in the whale, the skeleton loses about one fifth in length
longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth, or one of the middle ribs,
magnitude of that part.  Besides, for some way, where I now saw but a naked
magnitude, between eighty-five and ninety feet in length, and something less
means the mould of his invested form.  The largest of the Tranque ribs, one
measured but little more than eight feet.  So that this rib only conveyed half
muscle, blood, and bowels.  Still more, for the ample fins, I here saw but a
nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were each successively
no.  only in the heart of quickest perils; only when within the eddyings of
of the middle ones, occupied that part of the fish which, in life, is greatest
of the skeleton; as it is by far the most complicated part; and as nothing
of the true notion of the living
place, I wish to lay before you a particular, plain statement, touching the
poring over his dead attenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood.
proportion of the entire extent
ribs diminished, till the tenth and last only spanned five feet and some
seventy tons for the largest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length;
ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some twenty of her naked bow-ribs are
skull, spout-hole, jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts,
spine, all that had been once wrapped round with tons of added bulk in flesh,
than forty feet in its fullest circumference, such a whale will weigh at
that when fully invested and extended in life, he must have been ninety feet
this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine, extending far
thousand one hundred inhabitants.  Think you not then that brains, like yoked
timber.  The ribs were ten on a side.  The first, to begin from the neck, was
untravelled man to try to comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely
was the mighty circular basket of ribs which once enclosed his vitals.  To me
whale must have been at least sixteen feet; whereas, the corresponding rib




     Then the whole world was the whale's; and, king of creation, he left his
     glimpses into those Polar eternities; when wedged bastions of ice pressed
     that the skeleton of the whale furnishes but little clue to the shape of his
     was
, on the
.. <p 454 >
.. <p 455 >
A significant illustration of the fact, again and again repeated in this book,
Basilosaurus.  But some specimen bones of it being taken across the sea to
But by far the most wonderful of all cetacean relics was the almost complete
John Leo, the old Barbary traveller.  Not far from the Sea-side, they have a
Leviathans, their incalculable seniors; I am, by a flood, borne back to that
Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the antiquity of the
Pharaoh's.  Methuselah seems a school-boy.  I look round to shake hands with
Scotland, and in the States of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama.  Among the
Shem.  I am horror-struck at this antemosaic, unsourced existence of the
Temple, the Rafters and Beams of which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales
akin to them in general respects, to justify their taking ranks as Cetacean
answer to any known species of the present time, they are yet sufficiently
bearing on the other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronical
been found at the base of the Alps, in Lombardy, in France, in England, in
blotted out of existence.  When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons,
bones and skeletons, have within thirty years past, at various intervals,
ceiling a sculptured and painted planisphere, abounding in centaurs,
directly upon the palace of the Tuileries; and bones disinterred in
disinterred in the Rue Dauphine in Paris, a short street opening almost
doctors declared it a huge reptile, and bestowed upon it the name of
excavating the great docks of Antwerp, in Napoleon's time.  Cuvier pronounced
find the unmistakable print of his fin.  In an apartment of the great temple
fossils.  Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of their
fully invested body.  So Owen rechristened the monster Zeuglodon; and in his
globe of the moderns.  Gliding among them, old Leviathan swam as of yore; was
griffins, and dolphins, similar to the grotesque figures on the celestial
hard upon what are now the Tropics; and in all the 25,000 miles of this
hitherto discovered belong to the Tertiary period, which is the last
left his pre-adamite traces in the stereotype plates of nature, and in
limestone and marl bequeathed his ancient bust; but upon Egyptian tablets,
more curious of such remains is part of a skull, which in the year
needs exist after all humane ages are over.  But not alone has this Leviathan
of Denderah, some fifty years ago, there was discovered upon the granite
one of the most extraordinary creatures which the mutations of the globe have
owen, the english anatomist, it turned out that this alleged reptile was a
paper read before the London Geological Society, pronounced it, in substance,
pedigree like Leviathan?  Ahab's harpoon had shed older blood than the
plantation of Judge Creagh, in Alabama.  The awe-stricken credulous slaves in
preceding the superficial formations.  And though none of them precisely
resemblances to the existing breeds of sea-monsters; but at the same time
skulls, tusks, jaws, ribs, and vertebrae, all characterized by partial
the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the fallen angels.  The Alabama
there swimming in that planisphere, centuries before Solomon was cradled.
these fragments to have belonged to some utterly unknown Leviathanic species.
unspeakable terrors of the whale, which, having been before all time, must
vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year
wake along the present lines of the Andes and the Himmalehs.  Who can show a
whale, in his own osseous post-diluvian reality, as set down by the venerable
whale, though of a departed species.
whose antiquity seems to claim for them an almost fossiliferous character, we
with man.  Here Saturn's grey chaos rolls over me, and I obtain dim, shuddering
wondrous period, ere time itself can be said to have begun; for time began
world's circumference, not an inhabitable hand's breadth of land was visible.



     But you must look at this matter in every light.  Though so short a period
     and so remorseless a havoc; whether he must not at last be exterminated from
     and trappers of the West, when the far west (in whose sunset suns still
.. <p 458 >
Because, as has been elsewhere noticed, those whales, influenced by some
Behring's straits, and into the remotest secret drawers and lockers of the
Forty men in one ship hunting the Sperm Whale for forty-eight months think
a charmed circle of everlasting December, bid defiance to all pursuit from
ago --not a good life-time --the census of the buffalo in Illinois exceeded the
all.  And equally fallacious seems the conceit, that because the so-called
are considerations which render even this circumstance of little or no account
are now aggregated into vast but widely separated, unfrequent armies.  That is
as an opposing argument in this matter.  Natural as it is to be somewhat
at a dollar an inch; in such a comparison an irresistible argument would seem
been annually slain on the nor' west coast by the Americans alone; yet there
cachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that this
can at last resort to their Polar citadels, and diving under the ultimate
census of men now in London, and though at the present day not one horn or
coasts; the moot point is, whether Leviathan can long endure so wide a chase,
degree the scattered solitaries, yokes, and pods, and schools of other days
does it seem any argument in favor
from promontory to cape; and if one coast is no longer enlivened with their
furnished, to show that the hunted whale cannot now escape speedy extinction.
glassy barriers and walls there, come up among icy fields and floes; and in
globe, yet what shall we say to Harto, the historian of Goa, when he tells
hoof of them remains in all that region; and though the cause of this
hunted from the savannas and glades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales
incredulous concerning the populousness of the more enormous creatures of the
jets, then, be sure, some other and remoter strand has been very recently
look-outs at the mast-heads of the whale-ships, now penetrating even through
man.  But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for one
mentioned Leviathans, they have two firm fortresses, which, in all human
more recondite Nantucketers.  Whether owing to the almost omniscient
of the gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale, for example, that in former
oil of forty fish.  Whereas, in the days of the old Canadian and Indian hunters
overspread by tens of thousands the prairies of Illinois and Missouri, and
pods, were encountered much oftener than at present, and, in consequence,
positive havoc has already very seriously diminished their battalions.  But
probability, will for ever remain impregnable.  And as upon the invasion of
rise) was a wilderness and a virgin, the same number of moccasined men, for
shook their iron manes and scowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the
sites of populous river-capitals, where now the polite broker sells you land
startled by the unfamiliar spectacle.  Furthermore: concerning these last
that, if need were, could be statistically stated.  Nor, considered aright,
the same number of months, mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships,
the voyages were not so prolonged, and were also much more remunerative.
the waters, and the last whale, like the last man, smoke his last pipe, and
the whale-hunt peremptorily forbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan.
their valleys, the frosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains; so,
them, hence that species also is declining.  For they are only being driven
then himself evaporate in the final puff.  Comparing the humped herds of
they have done extremely well, and thank God, if at last they carry home the
though for some time past a number of these whales, not less than 13,000 have
us that at one hunting the King of Siam took
views to safety, now swim the seas in immense caravans, so that to a large
whale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years abounding with
whales with the humped herds of buffalo, which, not forty years ago,
wondrous extermination was the spear of man; yet the far different nature of
world; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted along all continental
would have slain not forty, but forty thousand and more buffaloes; a fact
years (the latter part of the last century, say) these Leviathans, in small


     Seat thyself sultanically among the
     but, besides the application to him of the generic remark above, this
.. < chapter cvii 11  THE CARPENTER >
.. <p 461 >
.. <p 462 >
.. <p 462 >
But, in the end, it all came out; this one matter did, at least.  That direful
Moreover, the ship's forge was ordered to be hoisted out of its temporary
Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps might more
a grandeur, and a woe.  But from the same point, take mankind in mass, and
all conspired, so far as in them lay, to muffle up the knowledge of this
and potentates of fire, have to do or not with earthly Ahab, yet, in this
birth-mark in the brow of man, is but the stamp of sorrow in the signers.
carpenter of the Pequod was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless
carpenter.  And when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him
circle the above hinted casualty --remaining, as it did, moodily unaccounted
clearest-grained stuff might be secured.  This done, the carpenter received
commanded to proceed at once to the forging of whatever iron contrivances
concerning Ahab, always had it remained a mystery to some, why it was, that
contemporary and hereditary.  But most humble though he was, and far from
diligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction.  To trail the
for a certain period, both before and after the sailing of the Pequod, he
for by Ahab --invested itself with terrors, not entirely underived from the
for it, independent of those pertaining to the distrusted one in use.
for the most part, they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates, both
furnishing an example of the high, humane abstraction; the Pequod's carpenter
genealogies
had elapsed, did it transpire upon the Pequod's decks.  But be all this as it
had hidden himself away with such Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness; and, for
handicrafts which more or less have to do with wood as an auxiliary material.
idleness in the hold; and, to accelerate the affair, the blacksmith was
in numerous trades and callings collateral to his own; the carpenter's
land of spirits and of wails.  So that, through their zeal for him, they had
may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod in the air, or the vindictive princes
might be needed.
mishap was at the bottom of his temporary recluseness.  And not only this, but
moons of Saturn, and take high abstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder,
mystic significance, and, in some men, an archangelic grandeur; so do their
no means adequate; though, indeed, as touching all Ahab's deeper part, every
of these high mortal miseries, carries us at last among the sourceless
on the voyage, in order that a careful selection of the stoutest,
orders to have the leg completed that night; and to provide all the fittings
possessed the privilege of a less banned approach to him; to that timid
present matter of his leg, he took plain practical procedures; --he called the
primogenitures of the gods; so that, in the face of all the glad, hay-making
properly, in set way, have been disclosed before.  With many other particulars
pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk of all those numerous
revelation partook more of significant darkness than of explanatory light.
sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially those belonging to whaling
senate of the dead.  Captain Peleg's bruited reason for this thing appeared by
suns, and soft-cymballing, round harvest-moons, we must needs give in to
supplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale) which had
that one interval, sought speechless refuge, as it were, among the marble
thing from others; and hence it was, that not till a considerable interval
this: that the gods themselves are not for ever glad.  The ineffaceable, sad
thought Ahab, while even the highest earthly felicities ever have a certain
thus far been accumulated
to that ever-contracting, dropping circle ashore, who, for any reason,
unsignifying pettiness lurking in them, but, at bottom, all heart-woes, a
vessels, he was, to a certain off-handed, practical extent, alike experienced
was no duplicate; hence, he now comes in person on this stage.  Like all
without delay set about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see him


    
     buckskin legs and calves of legs I've seen in shop windows wouldn't compare
( sneezes) there's no knee-joint to make; that might puzzle a little; but a
( sneezes)--yes it's ( sneezes)--bless my soul, it won't let me speak!  This is
( sneezes).  Come, come, you old Smut, there, bear a hand, and let's have
(Carpenter standing before his vice-bench, and by the light of two lanterns
.. < chapter cviii 7  AHAB AND THE CARPENTER THE DECK--FIRST NIGHT WATCH >
.. <p 465 >
.. <p 465 >
.. <p 466 >
About it!  There; keep thy finger on it.  This is a cogent vice thou hast
Carpenter, when he's through with that buckle, tell him to forge a pair of
Hold; while Prometheus is about it, I'll order a complete man after a
Just in time, sir.  If the captain pleases, I will now mark the length.  Let
Oh, sir, it will break bones--beware, beware!  No fear; I like a good grip; I
Prometheus about there? --the blacksmith, I mean --what's he about?  He must be
and there they were.  Yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled,
anomalously did its duty.  What that was, whether essence of quicksilver, or a
at all.  They soak water, they do; and of
awake.
better ( sneezes).  Halloa, this bone dust is ( sneezes)-- why it's
busily filing the ivory joist for the leg, which joist is firmly fixed in the
course get rheumatic, and have to be doctored ( sneezes) with washes and
desirable pattern.  Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then, chest
ensuing scene, the carpenter continues sneezing at times).  Well, manmaker!
few drops of hartshorn, there is no telling.  But there it was; and there it
forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.  Right.  It's a partnership; he supplies
good finish on.  Time, time; if I but only had the time, I could turn him
great part of the time soliloquizing; but only like an unreasoning wheel,
had abided for now some sixty years or more.  And this it was, this same
hard which should be soft, and that soft which should be hard.  So we go,
he did not have a common soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehow
here, carpenter; let me feel its grip once.  so, so; it does pinch some.
him, and the screw was fast: or if for tweezers, take him up by the legs,
his old Mogulship, and see whether the length will be all right; too short,
if anything, I guess.  Ha!  that's the heel; we are in luck; here he comes,
like to feel something in this slippery world that can hold, man.  What's
lotions, just like live legs.  There; before I saw it off, now, I must call
made in fire must properly belong to fire; and so hell's probable.  How the
me measure, sir.  Measured for a leg!  good.  Well, it's not the first time.
mere shinbone --why it's easy as making hop-poles; only I should like to put a
modelled after the Thames Tunnel; then, legs with roots to 'em, to stay in
now a most meaning thing, that that old Greek, Prometheus, who made men, they
one place; then, arms three
open-and-shut carpenter, was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton.  If
or it's somebody else, that's certain.  Ahab ( advancing). (During the
out as neat a leg now as ever ( sneezes) scraped to a lady in a parlor.  Those
say, should have been a blacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what's
soot flies!  This must be the remainder the Greek made the Africans of.
sorts lying about the bench.  Forward, the red flame of the forge is seen,
steel shoulder-blades; there's a pedlar aboard with a crushing pack.  Sir?
that ferule and buckle-screw; I'll be ready for them presently.  Lucky now
the muscle part.  He makes a fierce red flame there!  Aye, sir; he must have
the white heat for this kind of fine work.  Um-m.  So he must.  I do deem it
this soliloquizer on guard there, and talking all the time to keep himself
unaccountable, cunning life-principle in him; this it was, that kept him a
vice.  Slabs of ivory, leather straps, pads, screws, and various tools of all
what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber.  Saw a live tree, and
where the blacksmith is at work.) Drat the file, and drat the bone!  That is
which also hummingly soliloquizes; or rather, his body was a sentry-box and
who file old jaws and shinbones.  Let's try another.  Aye, now, this works
you don't get this dust; amputate a live bone, and you don't get it





     According to usage they
     Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may make good in a
     What will the owners say, sir?  Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and
     captain ahab mistakes; it is I. The oil in the hold is leaking, sir.  We
     slim, sure enough!  Now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts a lifetime,
--On deck!  Nay, sir, not yet; I do entreat.  And I do dare, sir --to be
.. < chapter cix 21  AHAB AND STARBUCK IN THE CABIN >
.. <p 469 >
.. <p 470 >
.. <p 471 >
Ahab, said the reddening mate, moving further into the cabin, with a daring
Ahab.  Devils!  Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of me?
Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the tropical outlets from the China
Look, driven one leg to death, and spavined the other for life, and now wears
Matsmai, and Sikoke.  With his snow-white new ivory leg braced against the
Now, from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa and the
a-calling with his horn for all legs, true or false, as brewery-men go round
affair.
ahab?  ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of most
almost forgot the little oval slate, smoothed ivory, where he figures up the
and hark ye, my conscience is in this ship's keel. --On deck!  Captain
and that must be because they use them mercifully, as a tender-hearted old
and there's a great cry for life-boats.  And here's the heron's leg!  long and
casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that's a far worse
collecting old beer barrels, to fill 'em up again.  What a leg this is!  It
conscience.  But look ye, the only real owner of anything is its commander;
find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to plug it, even if found, in
footstep at the door, but not turning round to it.  On deck!  Begone!
forbearing!  Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto, Captain
hand, the wondrous old man, with his back to the gangway door, was wrinkling
his brow, and tracing his old courses again.  Who's there?  hearing the
it almost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest outward
it is, so it is; if we get it.  I was speaking of the oil in the hold,
itself; A better man than I might well pass over in thee what he would
lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses.  But Ahab; oh he's a hard driver.
latitude.  So, so; chisel, file, and sand-paper, now!
leak!  I'm all aleak myself.  Aye!  leaks in leaks!  not only full of leaky
looks like a real live leg, filed down to nothing but the core; he'll be
manifestation of itself, but within also seemed more than half distrustful of
must up Burtons and break out.  Up Burtons and break out?  Now that we are
nearing Japan; heave-to here for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?
out bone legs by the cord.  Halloa, there, you Smut!  bear a hand there with
outyell the Typhoons.  What cares Ahab?  Owners, owners?  Thou art always
plight than the Pequod's, man.  Yet I don't stop to plug my leak; for who can
prating to me, Starbuck, about those miserly owners, as if the owners were my
quickly enough resent in a younger man; aye!  and in a happier, Captain
representing the long eastern coasts of the Japanese islands -- Niphon,
screwed leg of his table, and with a long pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his
sir.  And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all.  Begone!  Let it
so strangely respectful and cautious that
standing on this to-morrow; he'll be taking altitudes on it.  Halloa!  I
the oriental archipelagoes spread before him; and another separate one
this life's howling gale?  Starbuck!  I'll not have the Burtons hoisted.
those screws, and let's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes
was shown; and Starbuck went down into the cabin to report this unfavorable
waters into the Pacific.  And so Starbuck found Ahab with a general chart of
were pumping the ship next morning; and lo!  no inconsiderable oil came up
with the water; the casks below must have sprung a bad leak.  Much concern
year.  What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth saving, sir.  So


     days' suffering, laid him in his hammock, close to the very sill of the door
     that --let us say it again --no dying Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier
.. <p 474 >
.. <p 475 >
Eternity.  An awe that cannot be named would steal over you as you sat by the
When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted, he
all else in him thinned, and his cheek-bones grew sharper, his eyes,
all the indifferent promptitude of his character, proceeded into the
at the bottom of a well.  And a well, or an ice-house, it somehow proved to
beheld who were bystanders when Zoroaster died.  For whatever is truly
being buried in his hammock, according to the usual sea-custom, tossed like
breakers of the milky way.  He added, that he shuddered at the thought of
chalking Queequeg's person as he shifted the rule.  Ah!  poor fellow!  he'll
commanded to do Queequeg's bidding, whatever it might include.  There was some
dark canoes, and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him; for
die, or be weakened.  And like circles on the water, which, as they grow
done, he marshalled the planks and his tools, and to work.
drawing near of Death, which alike levels all, alike impresses all with a
fainter, expand; so his eyes seemed rounding and rounding, like the rings of
flood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven.  Not a
forecastle and took Queequeg's measure with great accuracy, regularly
from these dark planks the coffin was recommended to be made.  No sooner was
have to die now, ejaculated the Long Island sailor.  Going to his
he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever; and at last, after some
heathenish, coffin-colored old lumber aboard, which, upon a long previous
him, poor pagan; where, strange to say, for all the heat of his sweatings,
involved but uncertain steering, and much lee-way adown the dim ages.  Now,
isles, but that far beyond all visible horizons, their own mild,
it was not unlike the custom of his own race, who, after embalming a dead
last revelation, which only an author from the dead could adequately tell.  So
learned that all whalemen who died in Nantucket, were laid in those same
lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it, inquiring whether they
like a whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel; though that
made the transfer permanent by cutting two notches at its extremities.  This
man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg himself, what he
morning watch, when the day was just breaking, and taking his hand, said
nevertheless, seemed growing fuller and fuller; they became of a strange
of death.  How he wasted and wasted away in those few long-lingering days,
of poor Queequeg, as he quietly lay in his swaying hammock, and the rolling
one to him in the grey
sea seemed gently rocking him to his final rest, and the ocean's invisible
sickness, a wondrous testimony to that immortal health in him which could not
side of this waning savage, and saw as strange things in his face, as any
softness of lustre; and mildly but deeply looked out at you there from his
something vile to the death-devouring sharks.  No: he desired a canoe like
that while in Nantucket he had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark
the carpenter apprised of the order, than taking his rule, he forthwith with
those of Nantucket, all the more congenial to him, being a whaleman, that
thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favor he asked.  He called
thoughts than those, whose mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face
till there seemed but little left of him but his frame and tattooing.  But as
to the starry archipelagoes; for not only do they believe that the stars are
transferringly measured on it the exact length the coffin was to be, and then
uncontinented seas, interflow with the blue heavens; and so form the white
upon him there; where, stripped to his woollen drawers, the tattooed savage
vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience' sake and general reference, now
voyage, had been cut from the aboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands, and
warrior, stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to be floated away
was crawling about amid that dampness and slime, like a green spotted lizard
when this strange circumstance was made known aft, the carpenter was at once
wondrous and fearful in man, never yet was put into words or books.  And the
wood, like the rich war-wood of his native isle; and upon inquiry, he had




     When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged
     and so be unsolved to the last.  And this thought it must have been which
     greeted my dear Pacific with uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication
     impenetrable Japans.  Thus this mysterious, divine Pacific zones the world's
.. < chapter cxi 2  THE PACIFIC >
.. <p 477 >
.. <p 478 >
.. <p 479 >
Ahab's brain, as standing like an iron statue at his accustomed place beside
Bashee isles (in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and with
Evangelist St.  John.  And meet it is, that over these sea-pastures,
Queequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrous work in
With a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; and emptying
at last upon the great South Sea; were it not for other things, I could have
beheld, must ever after be the sea of his adoption.  It rolls the midmost
beneath; like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried
civilized; that while a sick, civilized man may be six months convalescing,
drawings; and it seemed that hereby he was striving, in his rude way, to copy
earth, and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth; so that
from surveying poor Queequeg -- Oh, devilish tantalization of the gods!
generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-well again in a day.  So, in
good time my Queequeg gained strength; and at length after sitting on the
he spent, in carving the lid with all manner of grotesque figures and
heart of earth.  Lifted by those eternal swells, you needs must own the
hoisted boat, and poising a harpoon, pronounced himself fit for a fight.
in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming.  Launched at length
into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.  Many spare hours
live heart beat against them; and these mysteries were therefore destined in
made up his mind to live, mere sickness could not kill him: nothing but a
marks, had written out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the
milky-ways of coral isles, and low-lying, endless, unknown Archipelagoes, and
of mixed shades and shadows, drowned dreams, somnambulisms, reveries; all
of my youth was answered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a
one volume; but whose mysteries not even himself could read, though his own
parts of the twisted tattooing on his body.  And this tattooing, had been the
planted by the recentest race of men, and lave the faded but still gorgeous
restlessness.  To any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once
rigging, with one nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the
same waves wash the moles of the new-built Californian towns, but yesterday
seductive god, bowing your head to Pan.  But few thoughts of Pan stirred
skirts of Asiatic lands, older than Abraham; while all between float
slumberers in their beds; the ever-rolling waves but made so by their
stretching, yawned a little bit, and then springing into the head of his
suddenly leaped to his feet, threw out arms and legs, gave himself a good
suggested to Ahab that wild exclamation of his, when one morning turning away
that sort.  Now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage and
that we call lives and souls, lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing like
the end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon they were inscribed,
the mizen
the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea; that sea
this sea, whose gently awful stirrings seem to speak of some hidden soul
thousand leagues of blue.  There is, one knows not what sweet mystery about
upon these almost final waters, and gliding towards the Japanese
waters of the world, the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms.  The
waves should rise and fall, and ebb and flow unceasingly; for here, millions
whale, or a gale, or some violent, ungovernable, unintelligent destroyer of
whole bulk about; makes all coasts one bay to it; seems the tide-beating
wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters' Fields of all four continents, the
windlass for a few indolent days (but eating with a vigorous appetite) he
work of a departed prophet and seer of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic







     Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one.
     Look ye here, then, cried Ahab, passionately advancing, and leaning with
     With matted beard, and swathed in a
     the Unshored; therefore, to the death-longing eyes of such men, who still
     the forge choked up with cinders; the house was sold; the mother dived down
     thy grave-stone, too, within the churchyard, and come hither, till we marry
     till at last, Perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammering it
-- Come hither, broken-hearted; here is another life without the guilt of
.. < chapter cxiii 2  THE FORGE >
.. <p 482 >
.. <p 483 >
Come hither!  bury thyself in a life which, to your now equally abhorred and
Perth, resting for a moment on his hammer; I am past scorching; not easily
abhorring, landed world, is more oblivious than death.  Come hither!  put up
all misery in others that is not mad.  Thou should'st go mad, blacksmith;
all-contributed and all-receptive ocean alluringly spread forth his whole
almost any seams and dents; never mind how hard the metal, blacksmith?
and feel thy heaviest hammer between my eyes.  Answer!  Can'st thou smoothe
and from the hearts of infinite Pacifics, the thousand mermaids sing to them
and the houseless, familyless old man staggered off a vagabond in crape; his
both hands on Perth's shoulders; look ye here -- here --can ye smoothe out a
bristling shark-skin apron, about mid-day, Perth was standing between his
can'st thou scorch a scar.  Well, well; no more.  Thy shrunk voice sounds
chickens, Perth?  they are always flying in thy wake; birds of good omen,
every day grew more and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter
every woe unreverenced; his grey head a scorn to flaxen curls!  Death seems
fall of eve, the blacksmith's soul responded, Aye, I come!  And so Perth
flights, some of which flew close to Ahab.  Are these thy Mother Carey's
forge and anvil, the latter placed upon an iron-wood log, with one hand
glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children; the bellows fell;
have left in them some interior compunctions against suicide, does the
holding a pike-head in the coals, and with the other at his forge's lungs,
intermediate death; here are wonders supernatural, without dying for them.
into the long church-yard grass; her children twice followed her thither;
it.  And can'st thou make it all smooth, again, blacksmith, after such hard
launching into the region of the strange Untried; it is but the first
leathern bag.  While yet a little distance from the forge, moody Ahab paused;
making there?  Welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in
one?  aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable; for
plain of unimaginable, taking terrors, and wonderful, new-life adventures;
salutation to the possibilities of the immense Remote, the Wild, the Watery,
say, why dost thou not go mad?  How can'st thou endure without being mad?  Do
seam like this, blacksmith, sweeping one hand across his ribbed brow;;if
than the last; the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes,
the heavens yet hate thee, that thou can'st not go mad? --What wert thou
the only desirable sequel for a career like this; but Death is only a
thee!  Hearkening to these voices, East and West, by early sun-rise, and by
this seam?  Oh!  that is the one, sir!  Said I not all seams and dents but
thou could'st, blacksmith, glad enough would I lay my head upon thy anvil,
though thou only see'st it here in my flesh, it has worked down into the bone
too calmly, sanely woful to me.  In no Paradise myself, I am impatient of
too, but not to all; --look here, they burn; but thou--thou liv'st among them
upon the anvil --the red mass sending off the sparks in thick hovering
usage as it had?  I think so, sir.  And I suppose thou can'st smoothe
went a-whaling.
when captain ahab came along, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking
without a scorch.  Because I am scorched all over, Captain Ahab, answered



     And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact and fancy,
     Penetrating further and further into the
--though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life, --in ye, men yet
.. < chapter cxiv 20  THE GILDER >
.. < chapter cxv 16  THE PEQUOD MEETS THE BACHELOR >
.. <p 485 >
.. <p 486 >
.. <p 487 >
.. <p 487 >
Ahab.  But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his own secret
But ere he entered his cabin, a light, unnatural, half-bantering, yet most
If.  But once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys,
Starbuck lowly murmured: -- Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his
all day upon smooth, slow heaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a
and men, and Ifs eternally.  Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no
and twenty hours on the stretch, they were engaged in the boats, steadily
beauty and brilliancy of the ocean's skin, one forgets the tiger heart that
birch canoe; and so sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves, that
black tragedy of the melancholy ship, and mocked it!
blessed calms would last.  But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven
boyhood's thoughtless faith, adolescence' doubt (the common doom), then
by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm.  There is
conceals a remorseless fang.  These are the times, when in his whale-boat the
day, too, gazing far down from his boat's side into that same golden sea,
dreamy quietude, when beholding the tranquil
fishery.  Often, in mild, pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen,
golden treasuries, yet did his breath upon them prove but tarnishing.  Oh,
gradations, and at the last one pause: --through infancy's unconscious spell,
grassy glades!  oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in ye,
half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.  Nor did such
heart of the Japanese cruising ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the
hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.  The long-drawn virgin
high rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie: as when
history; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has always been jolly!
hum; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie sleeping in these
kidnapping cannibal ways.  Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I
leaped up in that same golden light: -- I am Stubb, and Stubb has his
like hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale; these are the times of
look deep down and do believe.  And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales,
may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some few fleeting
moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them.  Would to God these
more?  in what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will
never weary?  Where is the foundling's father hidden?  Our souls are like
no steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember, that this velvet paw but
paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.  And that same
piteous sound was heard.  Oh, Pip!  thy wretched laugh, thy idle but
pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the whales, or for an interlude of
revealing only the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not though
rover softly feels a certain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the
scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood's pondering repose of
sea; that he regards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship
sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising; though with but
small success for their pains.  At such times, under an abated sun; afloat
solitudes, in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the woods are plucked.
soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as temporary an effect on
the western emigrants' horses only show their erected ears, while their
those orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our
unresting eye; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the
vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these there steals the hush, the
young bride's eye! --Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy





     Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round
     Not seldom in this life, when, on the
     The four whales slain that evening
     the crimson fight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky,
     vain!  In vain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon
.. < chapter cxvi 2  THE DYING WHALE >
.. < chapter cxvii 23  THE WHALE WATCH >
.. <p 490 >
.. <p 491 >
.. <p 491 >
Ahab, leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound craft, he took from
Forward there!  Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!  And thus, while the
Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, had gone to
Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed jet! --that one strivest, this one jettest all in
again, without a lesson to me.  Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power!
all hum of human weal or woe; in these most candid and impartial seas; where
all-quickening sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again.  Yet
almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent valleys of the
aloud, Thou art a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayest; well, then,
and invoking brow, with his last dying motions.  He too worships fire; most
and turns him to it, --how slowly, but how steadfastly, his homage-rendering
before, catch somewhat of the rushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging
billows are my foster-brothers!
billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine
bones hast builded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these
call me an empty ship, and outward-bound.  So go thy ways, and I will mine.
deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned off from the whale, sat intently
dost thou, darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith.  All thy
earth, yet suckled by the sea; though hill and valley mothered me, ye
encountering the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and four were slain; and one
evening, somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.  He turns
faith; but see!  no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it
faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun! --Oh that these too-favoring eyes
filled with Nantucket soundings.
grave, lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor; but the Bachelor's
head, and so expiring --that strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid
heads some other way. -- Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned
his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the ship to the vial,
homeward-bound.  How wondrous familiar is a fool!  muttered Ahab; then
it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew of the Pequod looking with
living things, exhaled as air, but water now.  Then hail, for ever hail, O
me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm.
men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they were in.  And as
of them by Ahab.  It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of
one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other stubbornly fought against
plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, that it
right side, fortune's favorites sail close by us, we, though all adroop
sails fill out.  So seemed it with the Pequod.  For next day after
sea, freighted with these vesper hymns.  Soothed again, but only soothed to
sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl finds his only rest.  Born of
seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together, for that vial was
should see these too-favoring sights.  Look!  here, far water-locked; beyond
spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying --the turning sunwards of the
sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and such
to traditions no rocks furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the
unnamable imminglings, float beneath me here; I am buoyed by breaths of once
unverdured seas; thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to
upon the Niger's unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full of
watching his final wanings from the now tranquil boat.  For that strange


     Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest
     but what after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pitiful point, where
.. < chapter cxix 19  THE CANDLES >
.. <p 494 >
.. <p 495 >
.. <p 495 >
Commodores, and Captains; the world brags of thee, of thy cunning and might;
Moby Dick?  This instant thou must be eyeing him.  These eyes of mine look
Skies the most effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba
Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead.  When darkness came on, sky and
and destroy thee!  As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with
at length remain but one little heap of ashes!  Aye, cried Stubb, but
awestruck by the aspect of their commander, the seamen clustered together on
braces!  Up helm! --square in!  In an instant the yards swung round; and as
but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now scorched with thy light, O
cards into these old hands of mine; swears that I must play them, and no
charcoal.  Well, well; I heard Ahab mutter, "Here some one thrusts these
day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and bare-poled was left to fight a
dead-reckoning, by log and by line; these shall conduct me, and show me my
die it!
dumbest dust.  Old man of oceans!  of all this fiery life of thine, what will
fangs: the tiger of Bengal crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure.
fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself --these passed over the mute,
firmament.  Curse thee, thou quadrant!  dashing it to the deck, no longer
have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full of its
his live and dead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a
insultest the sun!  Science!  Curse thee, thou vain toy; and cursed be all
into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye, and into the eye that
is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown, thither side of
knows tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands.  So, too, it is, that in
like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.  Towards evening of that
long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient
mighty Pilot!  thou tellest me truly
motionless Parsee's face.  Unobserved he rose and glided away; while,
muttered: Foolish toy!  babies' plaything of haughty Admirals, and
not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant him to gaze on his
one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet with thy impotence thou
other, its numerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and
others."  And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the game, and
place on the sea.  Aye, lighting from the boat to the deck, thus I
sea roared and split with the thunder, and blazed with the lightning, that
sea-coal ashes --mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck --sea-coal, not your common
showed the disabled masts fluttering here and there with
steed.  Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod's
storms, the Typhoon.  It will sometimes burst from out that cloudless sky,
sun!  Level by nature to this earth's horizon are the glances of man's eyes;
that precise instant.  Then falling into a moment's revery, he again looked
the forecastle, till Ahab, troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out -- To the
the ship half-wheeled
the things that cast man's eyes aloft to that heaven, whose live vividness
thee, thou sun!  Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the
thee: no!  not one jot more!  Thou canst not tell where one drop of water or
these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of all
thou tell where some other thing besides me is this moment living?  Where is
thou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet, and the hand that holds
tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down, down, to
trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split
tumultuous way, and Ahab's also, as he went lurching along the deck.  I
up towards the sun and murmured to himself: Thou sea-mark!  thou high and
upon her heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her
where I am --but canst thou cast the least hint where I shall be?  Or canst
will I guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship's compass, and the level


     No, no, it wasn't; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I hope
     a spar, a number of the seamen, arrested by the glare, now cohered
.. <p 499 >
.. <p 500 >
Hand me those main-mast links there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let
Hear me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck;
I'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes, that all the world
Queequeg's tattooing burned like Satanic blue flames on his body.  The tableau
Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one.  It was Stubb.  What
The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely
Then turning --the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot upon
all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more the Pequod and
all!  To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance
aloft, few words were heard from the enchanted crew; who in one thick
altar.  Blast the boat!  let it go!  cried Stubb at this instant, as a
been woven into the shrouds and the cordage.  While this pallidness was burning
beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor.  The
bowels for a laugh?  And look ye, Mr. Starbuck --but it's too dark to look.
burning in that sulphurous air, like three gigantic wax tapers before an
candles --that's the good promise we saw.  At that moment Starbuck caught
cluster stood on the forecastle, all their eyes gleaming in that pale
corpusants have mercy on us all, cried Stubb, again.  At the base of the
cried Ahab; let's have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.  Yet
cried Starbuck.  The corpusants!  the corpusants!  All the yard-arms were
deck; but all their eyes upcast.  Aye, aye, men!  cried Ahab.  Look up at
erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.  Oh!  thou clear spirit
every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall.  A moment or two passed, when
finger has been laid on the ship; when his mene, mene, Tekel Upharsin has
for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a' block with
from the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teter over to a seething sea; but
gleamed as if they too
had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up by the preternatural light,
immediately shifting his tone, he cried -- The corpusants have mercy on us
in Ahab's front, but with his head bowed away from him; while near by, from
in all my voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when God's burning
it; mark it well; the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale!
like sap in a tree.  Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame, the parsee was kneeling
may be secured; but out on privileges!  Let them be, sir.  Look aloft!
mine beat against it; blood against fire!  So.
of the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses
orchard twig.  In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or
phosphorescence, like a far away constellation of stars.  Relieved against
post.  Are they overboard?  drop them over, fore and aft.  Quick!  Avast!
real stature, and seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come.
sight of Stubb's face slowly beginning to glimmer into sight.  Glancing
slipping backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and
sperm-oil, d'ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts,
stepping, or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the
swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale
the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, he stood
the arched and overhanging rigging, where they had just been engaged securing
the ghostly light, the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his
the rods!  cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished to vigilance by
the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux, to light Ahab to his
they will, still.  But do they only have mercy on long faces? --have they no
thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not the same in the song.
tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each tri-pointed lightning-rod-end
together, and hung pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping,
upwards, he cried: See!  see!  and once more the high tapering flames were
violently jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing.  Blast it! --but
with three tapering white flames, each of the three tall masts was silently



    
     Stubb and Flask
     The anchors are working, sir.  Shall I get them inboard?  Strike nothing,
.. < chapter cxx 10  THE DECK TOWARDS THE END OF THE FIRST NIGHT WATCH >
.. < chapter cxxi 2  MIDNIGHT--THE FORECASTLE BULWARKS >
.. <p 502 >
.. <p 503 >
.. <p 504 >
Ahab standing by the helm.  Starbuck approaching him.  We must send down the
Flask.  But hark, again, and I'll answer ye the other thing.  First take your
Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees?  Here are hydrants,
What a hold they have, too!  I wonder, Flask, whether the world is anchored
What are you talking about, then?  Not one ship in a hundred carries rods,
ago is it since you said the very contrary?  Didn't you once say that whatever
and Ahab, --aye, man, and all of us, --were in no more danger then, in my poor
and stir nothing, but lash everything.  The wind rises, but it has not got
anywhere; if she is, she swings with an uncommon long cable, though.  There,
at your coat collar.  Don't you see, then, that for these extra risks the
be sensible, Flask?  it's easy to be sensible; why don't ye, then?  any man
big generous hands they are, to be sure.  These are your iron fists, hey?
but you will never pound into me what you were just now saying.  And how long
did run from him in a terror of dismay.
find it rather hard.  Yes, when a fellow's soaked through, it's hard to be
half-stranded.  Shall I strike it, sir?  Strike nothing; lash it.  If I had
hanging.  No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please,
harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can pass the rope;
lightning-rod at all in a storm?  Don't you see, you timber-head, that no
lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn't got any
little man, you have pretty red hair, but you couldn't get afire now.  Shake
lucifers forward?  Stop, now; didn't you say so?  Well, suppose I did?  What
main-top-sail yard!  Ho, gluepots!  Loftiest trucks were made for wildest
main-top-sail yard, sir.  The band is working loose, and the lee lift is
mark for thunderbolts; so at those last words of ahab's many of the mariners
medicine!
men fly the neighborhood of some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and
mind; catch the turn there, and pass it.  Seems to me we are lashing down
mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the anchors there
not know that the colic is a noisy malady.  Oh, take medicine, take
now listen.  What's the mighty difference between holding a mast's
officer's skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash.  Why don't ye
opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas.  Why,
policy, just as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of
sensible, that's a fact.  And I am about drenched with this spray.  Never
ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay something extra on its insurance
sky-sail poles, I'd sway them up now.  Sir? --in God's name! --sir?  Well.
strength but render it so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a
strike that?  Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest
supposing we are loaded with powder barrels aft and lucifers forward; how
takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some coasting smack.  Send down my
the devil could the lucifers get afire in this drenching spray here?  Why, my
then?  i've part changed my flesh since that time, why not my mind?  Besides,
these anchors now as if they were never going to be used again.  tying these
time.  What a hooroosh aloft there!  I would e'en take it for sublime, did I
two anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a man's hands behind him.  And what
up to my table-lands yet.  Quick, and see to it. --By masts and keels!  he
winds, and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.  Shall I
with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
with half an eye can be sensible.  I don't know that, Stubb.  You sometimes
you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every man in the world go about
yourself; you're Aquarius, or the water-bearer, Flask; might fill pitchers



     Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea
     Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he
     have his way.  If, then, he were this instant--put aside, that crime would
--Aye and he would fain kill all his crew.  Does he not say he will not strike
--I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very thing I handle now.
.. < chapter cxxiv 25  THE NEEDLE >
.. <p 507 >
.. <p 508 >
.. <p 508 >
I must see.  Aye, aye; and powder in the pan; -- that's not good.  Best spill
Only a fool would try it.  Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with
The land is hundreds of leagues away, and locked Japan the nearest.  I stand
What!  hope to wrest this old man's living power from his own living hands?
again. --Oh Mary!  Mary! --boy!  boy!  boy! --But if I wake thee not to death, old
against the door.  On this level, Ahab's hammock swings within; his head
alone here upon an open sea, with two oceans and a whole continent between
and doom, -- that's fair for Moby Dick.  It's a fair wind that's only fair for
and set; she heads her course.  Stern all!  Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart
and skin together? --And would I be a murderer, then, if --and slowly,
asleep, Mr Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell him.  I must see to
at last!  Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man's
be more hideous than a caged tiger, then.  I could not endure the sight;
can't withstand thee, then, old man.  Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not
could not possibly fly his howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable
deadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if Ahab
entreaty wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest.  Flat obedience to thy
error-abounding log?  and in this very Typhoon, did he not swear that he
handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I should shake so now.  Loaded?
have vow'd thy vow; say'st all of us are Ahabs.  Great God forbid! -- But is
he's sleeping.  Sleeping?  aye, but still alive, and soon awake again.  I
his spars to any gale?  Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant?  and in these
it --lift it.  Strange, that I, who have
it? --wait.  I'll cure myself of this. I'll hold the musket boldly while I
itself.  He would have shot me once, he murmured, yes, there's the very
make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come to any
man, who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck's body this day week may
me and law. --Aye, aye, 'tis so. --Is heaven a murderer
musket that he pointed at me; --that one with the studded stock; let me touch
muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but so blent with its
neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for
not be his.  Ha!  is he muttering in his sleep?  Yes, just there, --in there,
own flat commands, this is all thou breathest.  Aye, and say'st the men
placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.  He's too sound
reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage.  What, then, remains?
rolled in long slow billows of mighty bulk, and striving in the Pequod's
ropes and hawsers; chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would
same perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of the
sink, with all the crew!  Great God, where art thou?  Shall I?  shall I? --The
speak.  The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard's arm against the panel;
stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket's end
suffered to drag a whole ship's company down to doom with him? --Yes, it would
that accursed fish. --The very tube he pointed at me! --the very one; this one
the deck here.  Thou know'st what to say.
there no other way?  no lawful way? --Make him a prisoner to be taken home?
think. --I come to report a fair wind to him.  But how fair?  Fair for death
this way.  A touch, and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child
tormented sleep, as if Starbuck's voice had caused the long dumb dream to
upright man; but out of Starbuck's heart, at that instant when he saw the
when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed, tindering sheets
wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore and main topsails are reefed
would have no lightning-rods?  But shall this crazed old man be tamely




     Besides, the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles, though
     I wrecked thee, and to-day the compasses would feign have wrecked me.  So,
     Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining the vessel's
     While now the fated Pequod had been
     head of the lance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining,
--he called for linen thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two
.. < chapter cxxv 6  THE LOG AND LINE >
.. <p 511 >
.. <p 512 >
.. <p 512 >
Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as this was
But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened to glance
Starbuck looked away.  With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel
Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.  Take the reel, one of ye, I'll heave.
They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship's lee side, where the deck,
and angular log attached hung, long untouched, just beneath the railing of
and line.  The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows rolled in
bade him hold it upright, without its touching the deck.  Then, with the
bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own, that will point as true as any.
blunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less strongly hammered that,
clumsily practicable, was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious
demanded, my men, the thunder turned old Ahab's needles; but out of this
dictating the thing he was now about to do, were certain prudential motives,
exclaimed, --Look ye, for yourselves, if Ahab be not the lord of the level
eyes could persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they
for form's sake than anything else, regularly putting down upon the customary
frankly back from the binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it,
his fatal pride.
his quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about the level log
his subtile skill, in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses.
loadstone!  The sun is East, and that compass swears it!  One after another
maul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed the
middle, over one of the compass-cards.  At first, the steel went round and
of the steel, or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain
place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen, especially when cruising,
place, when Ahab, who had been intently watching for this result, stepped
progression every hour.  It had been thus with the Pequod.  The wooden reel
reversed needles there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its
riots.  Forward, there!  Heave the log!  Two seamen came.  The golden-hued
round, quivering and vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its
said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow.  But
sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.  Men, said he,
several times, the mate still holding the rod as before.  Then going through
sidelong-rushing sea.  The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by
slate the course steered by the ship, as well as the presumed average rate of
slunk away.  In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all
so long afloat this voyage, the log and line had but very seldom been in use.
so.  But Ahab is lord over the level load-stone
some small strange motions with it --whether indispensable to the magnetizing
steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him the things he had
the after bulwarks.  Rains and spray had damped it; the sun and wind had
the projecting handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool
the sail-maker's needles.  Quick!  Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse
they peered in, for nothing but their own
upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene, and he remembered how
warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly.
wholly neglect to heave the log; though at the same time, and frequently more
whose object might have been to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of
with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into the creamy,
yet.  Mr. Starbuck--a lance without a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of




     Mend it, eh?  I think we had best have a new line altogether.  I'll see Mr.
     Steering now south-eastward by Ahab's
     thee by thy black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor's!  There go two
     when in distress, but also from the human look of their round heads and
--that one and all, they started from their reveries, and for the space of
.. < chapter cxxvi 14  THE LIFE-BUOY >
.. <p 515 >
.. <p 516 >
.. <p 517 >
Christian or civilized part of the crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered;
Flask --was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly --like
Stubb about it.
White Whale, on the White Whale's own
all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous and desperate
at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the
bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though in sooth but a hard one.  And
but no hand rose to seize it, and the sun having long beat upon this cask
but the pagan harpooneers remained
carved Roman slave, while that wild cry remained within hearing.  The
company with her, crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail.  But this
daft ones now, muttered the old Manxman.  One daft with strength, the other
daft with weakness.  But here's the end of the rotten line --all dripping, too.
dawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch --then headed by
dawn, when he came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not
dropped from the stern, where it always hung obedient to a cunning spring;
explained the wonder.  Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort
for men.  But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most
full of the sweet things of love and gratitude.  Come!  I feel prouder leading
goodness, and in man all ill, lo you!  see the omniscient gods oblivious of
half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all Herod's murdered Innocents
his perch, when a cry was heard --a cry and a rushing --and looking up, they
it had shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and the parched wood also filled
levelled steel, and her progress solely determined by Ahab's level log and
line; the Pequod held on her path towards the Equator.  Making so long a
men in the sea.  below in his hammock, ahab did not hear of this till grey
of great numbers of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams,
only the more affected some of them, because most mariners cherish a very
or some dams that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept
passage through such unfrequented waters, descrying no ships, and ere long,
peculiar ground; that man was swallowed up in the deep.  But few, perhaps,
plausible confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning.  At
saw a falling phantom in the air; and looking down, a little tossed heap of
scene.  At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of
semi-intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside.  In
sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds, over waves monotonously mild;
some moments stood, or sat, or leaned all transfixedly listening, like the
sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it was thus with the man,
suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet
sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore; and
superstitious feeling about seals, arising not only from their peculiar tones
than are here.  come, then, to my cabin.  Lo!  ye believers in gods all
the Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before the
the sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken
the wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly drowned
there is now no telling; but, be that as it may, he had not been long at
thus the first man of the pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the
unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings.  He hollowly laughed, and thus
unappalled.  Yet the grey Manxman --the oldest mariner of all -- declared that
whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for sailors
white bubbles in the blue of the sea.  The life-buoy --a long slender cask --was






     Faith?  What's that?  Why, faith, sir, it's only a sort of exclamation-like
     Next day, a large
     Sing, sir?  Do I sing?  Oh, I'm indifferent enough, sir, for that; but the
     There's a sight!  There's sound!  The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
     and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in hand.  Dost thou never?
     things real are there, but imponderable thoughts?  Here now's the very
--that's all, sir.  Um, um; go on.  I was about to say, sir, that-- Art
--there's naught beneath.  And yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty
.. < chapter cxxviii 9  THE PEQUOD MEETS THE RACHEL >
.. <p 520 >
.. <p 521 >
.. <p 521 >
Isle of Albemarle, one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the
Rat-tat!  So man's seconds tick!  Oh!  how immaterial are all materials!  What
Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes;
again.  Now, then, Pip, we'll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous
am I in the dark side of earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one,
an immortality-preserver!  I'll think of that.  But no.  So far gone
and I'm the professor of musical glasses --tap, tap! ( Ahab to himself.)
believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?  Well enough.  But art
bosom!  Despatch!  and get these traps out of sight.  He goes aft.  That was
coffin for Queequeg; but they've set me now to turning it into something
coffin knock against the churchyard gate, going in?  Faith, sir, I've--
coffins?  Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a
day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those same
dreaded symbol of grim death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the
else.  Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, inter-meddling,
empty into thee!
following him.  Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently.  He goes!  Not
full of it.  Hark to it.  Aye, and that's because the lid there's a
further?  Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but
gods again.  hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin?  The
have been because there was none in his spade, sir.  But the calking mallet is
help and hope of most endangered life.  A life-buoy of a coffin!  Does it go
hollow tree!  Blind and dumb might well be envied now.  See!  that thing rests
jack-of-all-trades.  But I do not mean anything, sir.  I do as I do.  The
look, sir!  Beware the hatchway!  Thank ye, man.  Thy coffin lies handy to
middle.  He's always under the Line--fiery hot, I tell ye!  He's looking this
middle.  Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his
monopolizing, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the next
much the same, Carpenter.  Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the
not thou the leg-maker?  Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?  I
of a church!  What's here?  Life buoy, sir.  Mr. Starbuck's orders.  Oh,
on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines.  A most malicious wag, that fellow.
philosophies from thee!  Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must
reason why the grave-digger made music must
seems but uncertain twilight to me.  Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with
ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down upon the Pequod, all her
sounding-board; and what in all things makes the sounding-board is this
spars thickly clustering with men.  At the time the Pequod was making good
speed through the water; but as the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh
sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.  I've heard that the
that accursed sound?  I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return
the vault.  Sir?  The hatchway?  oh!  So it does, sir, so it does.  Art
this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy. -- Middle aisle
thou a silk-worm?  Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?  Look at thy
thou not also the undertaker?  Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a
way --come, oakum; quick.  Here we go again.  This wooden mallet is the cork,



     (Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches
     he descended into his cabin, leaving the strange captain transfixed at this
     till you say aye to me.  Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like
.. < chapter cxxix 2  THE CABIN >
.. <p 524 >
.. <p 525 >
Ahab; and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.
a black!  and crazy! --but methinks like-cures-like applies to him too; he
a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest but
a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for your one lost leg; only tread
again, and let the ship sail as before.  Hurriedly turning, with averted face,
and concern.  Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of
and that her yards were swung round; starboard and larboard, she continued to
been still another son; as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged
boats, always to pick up the majority first.  But the captain, for some
but I must go.  Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch, and in three
captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
case.  For you too have a boy, Captain Ahab --though but a child, and nestling
cried Ahab -- touch not a rope-yarn; then in a voice that prolongingly
curing to my malady.  Like cures like; and for this hunt, my malady becomes
display
first knowledge of a whaleman's career shall be unenervated by any chance
grows so sane again.  They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor
her still halting course and winding, woful way, you plainly saw that this
him by the hand to follow.) Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab
his chief mate's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship
his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell than
hither and thither at every dark spot, however small, on the sea.  This way
in such emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided
little Pip, whose drowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his
million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity of man! --and
minutes from this present instant warn off all strangers: then brace forward
moulded every word -- Captain Gardiner, I will not do it.  Even now I lose
my most desired health.  Do thou abide below here, where they shall serve
not have thee by him.  There is that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too
now.  The hour is coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would
number of the other boat's crews, at the same time, but on the other hand,
of a father's natural but untimely partiality, or undue apprehensiveness
safely at home now --a child of your old age too -- Yes, yes, you relent; I
screwed chair; another screw to it, thou must be.  No, no, no!  ye have not
see it --run, run, men, now, and stand by to square in the yards.  Avast,
separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase, there had
ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort.  She was
stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.  Soon the two ships diverged
tack; now she beat against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it;
the destiny of all his race.  Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
thee, as if thou wert the captain.  Aye, lad, thou shalt sit here in my own
their wakes; and long as the strange vessel was in view, she was seen to yaw
three or four years' voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their
three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying among the boughs.  But by
till forced to it by Ahab's iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy;
time.  Good bye, good bye.  God bless ye, man, and may I forgive myself,
to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially
to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by
unconditional and utter rejection of his so earnest suit.  But starting from
unknown constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not
unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer's paternal love, had thus early sought
upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain a part of ye.  Oh!  spite of
while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men, as
without the least quivering of his own.  I will not go, said the stranger,

     Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate, said,
-- Take the rope, sir --I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.  Then arranging
-- What d'ye see? --sharp!  sharp!  But when three or four days had slided by,
.. <p 528 >
.. <p 529 >
He would stand still for hours: but never sat or leaned; his wan but
Parsee his abandoned substance.  And yet, somehow, did Ahab --in his own proper
Still again both seemed yoked together, and an unseen
Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought.  But if
after meeting the children-seeking Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen;
attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end, in order to
become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee's mystic watch was without
before them; either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly pacing the planks
beside the pin, he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the
between two
by night or day could the mariners now step up the deck, unless Ahab was
concerned the slightest verbal interchange.  At times, for longest hours,
day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the planks;
doubloon!  and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed bowlines; and
expressing them, however his actions might seem to hint them.  I will have
fasten it at the rail.  This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing
gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat.  The clothes
glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard from aft -- Man the
he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that he had not swung
his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his
in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they could never tell
in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded night-damp
intermission as his own; yet these two never seemed to speak --one man to the
main-mast head, he received the two ends of the downward-reeved rope; and
mast-heads! --and all through the day, till after sunset and after twilight,
mortal substance, or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some
necessary.  Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly grew all gnarled, as
night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber, or go below.
of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether
open air; that is, his two only meals, -- breakfast and dinner: supper he
openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder.  If by day
other --unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it
other; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the
other; pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each
self, as daily, hourly, and every instant, commandingly revealed to his
sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block, to secure to the
standing in the cabin-scuttle, --his living foot advanced upon the deck, as if
subordinates, --Ahab seemed an independent lord; the Parsee but his slave.
that the night had wet, the next day's sunshine dried upon him; and so,
the first sight of the whale myself, --he said.  Aye!  Ahab must have the
the monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew's fidelity; at least,
the same voice every hour, at the striking of the helmsman's bell, was heard
these suspicions were really his, he sagaciously refrained from verbally
they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as
though perished in the upper verdure.  But though his whole life was now
to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that however motionless
tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib.  For be this Parsee
undeviating limits, --the main-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him
unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at naked base,
unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed at times; or
unseen being's body.  And that shadow was always hovering there.  For not by
what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.  At the first faintest
whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.  He ate in the same
whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, though he stood so
without a single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
wondrous eyes did plainly say --We two watchmen never rest.  Nor, at any time,




     Ha!  yonder!  look yonder, men!  cried a foreboding voice in her wake.  In
     It was a clear steel-blue day.  The
     Then God keep thee, old man --see'st thou that --pointing to the hammock -- I
     the contrast was only in shades and shadows without; those two seemed one;
--advancing towards the hammock with uplifted hands -- may the resurrection and
.. < chapter cxxxii 26  THE SYMPHONY >
.. <p 532 >
.. <p 532 >
.. <p 533 >
.. <p 534 >
Ahab leaned over the side, and watched how his shadow in the water sank and
But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the sound of
Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,
Martha, laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambol around their old sire;
Nantucketer;
and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue, rushed mighty
and the robust and man-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells,
and unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals, that still glow in the ashes of
as Samson's chest in his sleep.
away.  Tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles; haggardly firm
burnt-out crater of his brain.  Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle,
bury but one of five stout men, who were alive only yesterday; but were dead
czar and king, the sun seemed giving this gentle air to this bold and rolling
dispel, for a moment, the cankerous thing in his soul.  That glad, happy air,
ere night.  Only that one I bury; the rest were buried before they died;
firmaments of air and sea were hardly separable in that all-pervading azure;
here in this hand I hold his death!  Tempered in blood, and tempered by
immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure!  Invisible winged creatures
indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might have sprinkled her hull with
it was only the sex, as it were, that distinguished them.  Aloft, like a royal
levelled iron from the crotch, Ahab held it out, exclaiming -- Look ye,
leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong, troubled,
lightning are these barbs; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot
murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.  But though thus contrasting within,
neck, and did seem to joyously sob over him, as if over one, that however
only, the pensive air was transparently pure and soft, with a woman's look,
place behind the fin, where the white whale most feels his accursed life!
place the plank then on the rail, and lift the body; so, then -- Oh!  God
profundity.  But the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to
ruin; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of the morn; lifting his
sailors were busy in sewing together.  Not forged!  and snatching Perth's
sank to his gaze, the more and the more that he strove to pierce the
sea; even as bride to groom.  And at the girdling line of the horizon, a
so long cruel -- forbidding --now threw affectionate arms round his stubborn
soft and tremulous motion --most seen here at the equator --denoted the fond,
splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl's forehead of heaven.  Oh,
sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on the marge of that
strange life-buoy hanging at the Pequod's stern came into conspicuous relief.
that frolic all round us!  Sweet childhood of air and sky!  how oblivious were
that winsome sky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-mother world,
the life-- Brace forward!  Up helm!  cried Ahab like lightning to his men.
the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea; not so quick,
their ghostly baptism.  As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight, the
throbbing trust, the loving alarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom
to show us your coffin!
unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air; but to
vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn us your taffrail
wilful and erring, she could yet find it in her
ye of old Ahab's close-coiled woe!  But so have I seen little Miriam and
you sail upon their tomb.  Then turning to his crew -- Are ye ready there?


     That night, in the mid-watch,
     power; how then can this one small heart beat; this one small brain think
.. < chapter cxxxiii 2  THE CHASE--FIRST DAY >
.. <p 536 >
.. <p 537 >
.. <p 538 >
Come, my Captain, study out the course,
Soon that peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth by the
a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; and the air smells now, as if it
ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the main-top-sail and
all hands!  Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the
all the time; recklessly making me ready to do what in my own proper, natural
and let us away!  See, see!  the boy's face from the window!  the boy's hand
blew from a far-away meadow; they have been making hay somewhere under the
corpse's hue with despair, the Mate had stolen away.  Ahab crossed the deck
down, and left in the half-cut swaths --Starbuck!  But blanched to a
drawing nigh to some barbarous isle.  He declared that a whale must be near.
errand-boy in heaven; nor one single star can revolve, but by some invisible
face fiercely, snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in
field.  Sleep?  Aye, and rust amid greenness; as last year's scythes flung
forecastle deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that
he raised a gull-like cry in the air, There she blows! --there she blows!  A
heart, I durst not so much as dare?  Is Ahab, Ahab?  Is it I, God, or who,
his face to the sky.  Nothing, nothing, sir!  was the sound hailing down in
hump like a snow-hill!  It is Moby Dick!  Fired by the cry which seemed
lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in the pleated watery
living sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was any mariner
living, and not I. By heaven, man, we are turned round and round in this
lo!  that smiling sky, and this unsounded sea!  Look!  see yon Albicore!  who
lovings and longings, I so keep pushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on
man!  Who's to doom, when the judge himself is dragged to the bar?  But it is
master, and cruel, remorseless emperor commands me; that against all natural
nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it; what cozzening, hidden lord and
new-mown hay.  Sleeping?  Aye, toil we how we may, we all sleep at last on the
now gained his final perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego
on the hill!  But Ahab's glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he
put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish?  Where do murderers go,
rapidly ordered the ship's course to be slightly altered, and the sail to be
reply.  T'gallant sails! --stunsails!  alow and aloft, and on both sides!  All
rigging to behold the famous whale they had so long been pursuing.  Ahab had
sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved for swaying him to
shook, and cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.  What is it, what
shortened.  The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently
simultaneously taken up by the three look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the
slopes of the Andes, Starbuck, and the mowers are sleeping among the
surprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then the dog-vane, and
that lifts this arm?  But if the great sun move not of himself; but is as an
the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments they were hoisting him
the water there.  Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail.
then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as possible, Ahab
they seemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously did they appear
thither, when, while but two thirds of the way aloft, and while peering
thoughts; unless God does that beating, does that thinking, does that
tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.  Man the mast-heads!  Call
to gaze over on the other side; but started at two reflected, fixed eyes in
top-gallant-sail,
vindicated at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and
when the old man --as his wont at intervals --stepped forth from the scuttle in
which he leaned, and went to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his
with their clothes in their hands.  What d'ye see?  cried Ahab, flattening
world, like yonder windlass, and Fate is the handspike.  And all the time,
wrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-like marks of some swift

     eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms; but the tiger-yellow crew were
.. <p 541 >
.. <p 542 >
Ahab's head, and reached higher than that.  In this attitude the White Whale
Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of his submerged
Tashtego.  In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds
The bluish pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of
adrift, the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick's
all this, he seized the long bone with his naked hands, and wildly strove to
almost inside of him, as it were; and while the other boats involuntarily
and he gazed beyond the whale's place, towards the dim blue spaces and wide
and striving to hold fast to the oars to lash them across.  At that preluding
apparition.  Then, calling upon Fedallah to change places with him, went
beneath the boat, he could not be darted at from the bows, for the bows were
blue of the sea.  The glittering mouth yawned beneath
both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, as the whale dallied with
bows full within his mouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw
broken ends drooping, the crew at the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales,
curled high up into the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock.
expectant cries.  Their vision was keener than man's; Ahab could discover no
face the whale's head while yet under water.  But as if perceiving this
fluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, with joyous,
fore part of him slowly rose from the water; for an instant his whole
forward to the bows, and seizing Perth's harpoon, commanded his crew to
from him; the frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and snapped, as both jaws,
grasp their oars and stand by to stern.  Now, by reason of this timely
he left.  With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails
himself, sounded, and went out of sight.  Hoveringly halting, and dipping on
his back, in the manner of a biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its
his steering oar, Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendous
intent, by the crafty upraising of his head, a movement that loosed his
like an enormous shears, sliding further aft, bit the craft completely in
marbleized body formed a high arch, like Virginia's Natural Bridge, and
moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the first to perceive the whale's
monomaniac Ahab, furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which
mouth and scrolled jaw; his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with the
now freshened; the sea began to swell.  The birds! --the birds!  cried
now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse.  With unastonished
paused, as before a quick crisis impossible to withstand, then it was that
placed him all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied with
plank and each rib, it thrilled for an instant, the whale obliquely lying on
pleated head lengthwise beneath the boat.  Through and through; through every
profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger than a white weasel, with
reappearance.  An hour, said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern;
seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle.  The breeze
sidelingly transplanted himself, as it were, in an instant, shooting his
sign in the sea.  But suddenly as he peered down and down into its depths, he
spinning round the boat upon its axis, its bow, by anticipation, was made to
strategem, moby dick, with that malicious intelligence ascribed to him,
teeth, floating up from the undiscoverable bottom.  It was Moby Dick's open
the boat like an open-doored marble tomb; and giving one side-long sweep with
the doomed craft in this devilish way; and from his body being submerged
the sea, midway between the two floating wrecks.  These floated aside, the
the wing, the white sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that
then there were plainly revealed two long crooked rows of white, glistening
trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw.  But soon the
tumbling over each other's heads to gain the uttermost stern.  And now, while
twain, and locked themselves fast again in
warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air, the grand god revealed
were now all flying towards Ahab's boat; and when within a few yards began
wonderful celerity uprising, and magnifying as it rose, till it turned, and
wooing vacancies to leeward.  It was only an instant; for again his eyes
wrench it from its gripe.  As now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped



     Omen?  omen? --the dictionary!  If the gods think to speak outright to man,
     treble-banked his every fin; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed,
.. <p 545 >
.. <p 546 >
Captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreck exclaimed -- The thistle
D'ye see him?  Sing out for every spout, though he spout ten times a second!
Starbuck drawing near, 'tis a solemn sight; an omen, and an ill one.
Starbuck is Stubb reversed, and Stubb is Starbuck; and ye two are all
The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.  Soon,
across, so over the old man's face there now stole some such added gloom as
and then pacing the deck, binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second
and when he would be reported as just gone down, Ahab would take the time,
another boat, help to work that second boat; and the chase is thus continued
as in an already over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail
commanded them to lift him to his perch.  In this way the day wore on; Ahab,
evince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant place in his
gods nor men his neighbors!  Cold, cold --I shiver! --How now?  Aloft there!
hand to the fore-mast head, and see it manned till morning. --Then advancing
hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a still greater breadth --thus
indefinitely prolonged, if not a hopeless one; nor could any crew endure for
is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, being picked up by
is that man's; and if on that day I shall again raise him, then, ten times
it was almost dark, but the look-out men still remained unset.  Can't see
it; but I shall let it abide here till the White Whale is dead; and then,
its sum shall be divided among all of ye!  Away now! --the deck is thine, sir.
keep her full before the wind! --Aloft!  come down! --Mr. Stubb, send a fresh
last seen?  As before, sir, --straight to leeward.  Good!  he will travel
leeward wake of Moby Dick.  At the well known, methodic intervals, the
like the double-jointed wings of an albatross; the Pequod bore down in the
mankind; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of the peopled earth, nor
morning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while.  Helm there!
now aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the planks.  As he was thus
now?  D'ye see him?  and if the reply was, No, sir!  straightway he
of overtaking the chase.  Accordingly, the boats now made for her, and were
of the allotted hour expired, his voice was heard. -- Whose is the doubloon
of the boat did not equal the added power of the whale, for he seemed to have
poltroon.  Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck.  Aye, sir, said
previously secured by her --and then hoisting everything to her side, and
reversed; broken bow to shattered stern.  At last he paused before it; and
slower now 'tis night.  Down royals and
so long a period, such an unintermitted, intense straining at the oar; a
soon swayed up to their cranes --the two parts of the wrecked boat having been
soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck?  Man, man!  did I not know
stacking her canvas high up, and sideways outstretching it with stun-sails,
that if now, under these circumstances, pushed on, the chase would prove an
the ass refused; it pricked his mouth too keenly, sir; ha!  ha!  What
the spout now, sir; --too dark --cried a voice from the air.  How heading when
thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) I could swear thou wert a
then, as it sometimes happens, offered the most promising intermediate means
they will honorably speak outright; not shake their heads, and give an old
thing barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude.  The ship itself,
this.  Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, to
to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched hat, at every turn he passed his own
top-gallant stun-sails, Mr. Starbuck.  We must not run over him before
towards the doubloon in the main-mast -- Men, this gold is mine, for I earned
walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men aloft, or to bid them
whale's glittering spout was regularly announced from the manned mast-heads;
whosoever of ye first raises him, upon the day he shall be killed, this gold
with what is called double-banked oars.  It was thus now.  But the added power
wives' darkling hint. --Begone!  Ye two are the opposite poles of one thing;
wrecked boat, which had been dropped upon the quarter-deck, and lay there

     I knew it --ye can't escape --blow on and split your spout, O whale!  the mad
.. <p 549 >
.. <p 550 >
Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was dropped from his perch.  Lower
Rising with his utmost velocity from the furthest depths, the Sperm Whale
Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew.  The frenzies of the
They were one man, not thirty.  For as the one ship that held them all;
Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, like shooting
Whatever pale fears and forebodings some of them might have felt before;
advancing shower in a vale.  Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!
afternoon previous.  Mr. Starbuck, the ship is thine --keep away from the
away, he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat --a spare one, rigged the
bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like to Heaven.  So suddenly
breaches!  there she breaches!  was the cry, as in his immeasureable
burst into view!  For not by any calm and indolent spoutings; not by the
but one man at the fore.  The boats! --stand by!
but they were broken up, and on all sides routed, as timid prairie hares
central keel; even so, all the individualities of the crew, this man's
chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up, like old wine worked anew.
concrete hull, which shot on its way, both balanced and directed by the long
cried Ahab, thy hour and thy harpoon are at hand! --Down!  down all of ye,
dam off your blood, as a miller shuts his water-gate upon the stream!  And
disappears.  It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had
fading away from its first sparkling intensity, to the dim mistiness of an
far out on the rocking yards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals,
fiend himself is after ye!  blow your trump --blister your lungs! --Ahab will
glittered and glared like a glacier; and stood there gradually fading and
halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard, as --much nearer to the ship than
have been deceived; not moby dick casts one odd jet that way, and then
infinite blueness to seek out the thing that might destroy them!  Why sing ye
into oneness, and were all directed to that fatal goal which Ahab their one
lord and keel did point to.  The rigging lived.  The mast-heads, like the tops
mane; in some cases, this breaching is his act of defiance.  There she
margin of the sky, the spray that he raised, for the moment, intolerably
minutes since the first cry, no more had been heard.  Sway me up, men; ye
mistaken some other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon
more.  In those moments, the torn, enraged waves he shakes off, seem his
mountain of dazzling foam, shows his place to the distance of seven miles and
not out for him, if ye see him?  cried Ahab, when, after the lapse of some
of tall palms, were outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs.  Clinging to a
others, shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat
past night's suspense; the fixed, unfearing, blind, reckless way in which
peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head, did the White Whale now
proved; for hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope belayed
ready and ripe for their fate.  Ah!  how they still strove through that
reveal his vicinity; but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of breaching.
sails, and rushed the vessel on by arms invisible as irresistible; this
seemed the symbol of that unseen agency which so enslaved them to the race.
seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relieved against the still bluer
spar with one hand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings;
stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated back-stays and halyards; while
that scatter before the bounding bison.  The hand of Fate had snatched all
the air vibrate as with the combined discharges of rifles.  The triumphant
the place of the imaginary jet, less than a mile ahead --Moby Dick bodily
their hearts were bowled along.  The wind that made great bellies of their
their souls; and by the stirring perils of the previous day; the rack of the
their wild craft went plunging towards its flying mark; by all these things,
these were not only now kept out of sight through the growing awe of Ahab,
though it was put together of all contrasting things --oak, and maple, and pine
thus booms his entire bulk into the pure element of air, and piling up a
to its pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an orchestra, that made
valor, that man's fear; guilt and guiltiness, all varieties were welded
wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp --yet all these ran into each other in the one




     Accursed fate!
     Sir?  My body, man, not thee.  Give me something for a cane -- there, that
     The Parsee!  cried Stubb -- he must have been caught in-- The black vomit
     there, --d'ye see it? --the forged iron, men, the white whale's -- no, no, no,
--blistered fool; this hand did dart it! --'tis in the fish! --Aloft there!
--gone?  What means that little word? --What death-knell rings in it, that old
--not gone!  But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee
.. <p 553 >
.. <p 554 >
Ahab shakes as if he were the belfry.  The harpoon, too! --toss over the litter
I'll slay him yet!  Great God!  but for one single instant show thyself,
This whole act's immutably decreed. 'Twas rehearsed by thee and me a billion
all eyes were fastened upon him; as instead of standing by himself he still
be caught at, and safely landed them on her decks.  Some sprained shoulders,
be towed by him to the infernal world?  Oh, oh, -- Impiety and blasphemy to
boat's broken half, which afforded a comparatively easy float; nor did it so
concern.  Aye!  and all splintered to pieces, Stubb! --d'ye see it. -- But
cried Starbuck; never, never wilt thou capture him, old man --In Jesus' name
even with a broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account no living bone
evil shadow gone --all good angels mobbing thee with warnings: --what more
exhaust him as the previous day's mishap.  But when he was helped to the deck,
eyes.  But in this matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the
ferrule has not stood, sir, said the carpenter, now coming up; I put good
half-hung upon the shoulder of Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost
heaven it cannot be! --missing? -- quick!  call them all.  The old man's hinted
hunt him more!  Starbuck, of late I've felt strangely moved to thee; ever
inaccessible being.  Can any lead touch yonder floor, any mast scrape yonder
inextricable intricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all these were
keep him nailed --quick! --all hands to the rigging of the boats --collect the
leaner who he will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has.  The
me, men.  Ye see an old man cut down to the stump; leaning on a shivered
no more of this, that's worse than devil's madness.  Two days chased; twice
nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in his own proper and
oars --harpooneers!  the irons, the irons! -- hoist the royals higher --a pull
of mine one jot more me, than this dead one that's lost.  Nor white whale,
on all the sheets! --helm there!  steady, steady for your life!  I'll ten
palm of this hand --a lipless, unfeatured blank.  Ahab is for ever Ahab, man.
pile on the sail again, ship keepers!  down the rest of the spare boats and
rig them --Mr. Starbuck away, and muster the boat's crews.  Let me first help
roof? -- Aloft there!  which way?  Dead to leeward, sir.  Up helm, then;
sharp splinter.  Aye, aye, Starbuck, 'tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the
shivered lance will do.  Muster the men.  Surely I have not seen him yet.  By
since that hour we both saw --thou know'st what, in one another's
stove to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee; thy
that the unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!
the last man?  Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the sea?  Shall we
thee towards the bulwarks, sir.  Oh, oh, oh!  how this splinter gores me now!
there; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen any one.  As
thought was true.  Upon mustering the company, the Parsee was not there.
times girdle the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straight through it, but
to assist him.  His ivory leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short
under orders.  Look thou, underling!  that thou obeyest mine. --Stand round
was nowhere to be found.  Aye, sir, said Stubb -- caught among the tangles of
with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was now found grimly clinging to his
work into that leg.  But no bones broken, sir, I hope, said Stubb with true
wouldst thou have? --Shall we keep chasing this murderous fish till he swamps
wrench thee! --run all of ye above, alow, cabin, forecastle --find him --not gone
wrists, and ankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances;
years before this ocean rolled.  Fool!  I am the Fates' lieutenant; I act
your line --I thought I saw him dragging under.  My line!  my line?  Gone?





     a boy, from the sand-hills of Nantucket!  The same! --the same! --the same to
     a whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages.  time itself now held long
     and yet somehow so young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it,
     but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short.  Good by, mast-head --keep a good eye
     weather stains on Ahab's head!  There's the difference now between man's old
--that's bad; I might have known it, too.  Fool!  the lines --the harpoons
.. <p 557 >
.. <p 558 >
Mr. Starbuck.  The sails shake!  Stand over that helmsman with a top-maul!
Noah as to me.  There's a soft shower to leeward.  Such lovely leewardings!
So, so; he travels fast, and I must down.  But let me have one more good
They must lead somewhere --to something else than common land, more palmy than
What's this? -- green?  aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks.  No such green
advancing to the hempen basket.  We should meet him soon.  Aye, aye, sir,
again, and swear it now, that there's something all glorious and gracious in
age and matter's.  But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in
and straightway Starbuck did Ahab's bidding, and once more Ahab swung on high.
are bodiless, but only bodiless as objects, not as agents.  There's a most
aye, like many more thou told'st direful truth as touching thyself, O Parsee;
blow my good ship on; these Trades, or something like them --something so
bones feel
bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the three mast-heads
breaths with keen suspense.  But at last, some three points off the weather
coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail.  God keep us, but already my
compare with it; and I've known some ships made of dead trees outlast the
damp within me, and from the inside wet my flesh.  I misdoubt me that I
disobey my God in obeying him!  Stand by to sway me up!  cried Ahab,
doubloon goes a-begging!  See the sun!  Aye, aye, it must be so.  I've
down, all of ye, but the regular look outs!  Man the braces!  Steering as
endless stairs?  and all night I've been sailing from him, wherever he did
forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick!  On deck there! --brace
he's towing.  Aye, aye, I have run him by last night.  About!  about!  Come
heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way.  I can't
lives of men made of the most vital stuff of vital fathers.  What's that he
mightiest Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about, uncertain where
now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced ship sailed hard upon
our hulls, though, are we not, my ship?  Aye, minus a leg, that's all.  By
oversailed him.  How, got the start?  Aye, he's chasing me now; not I, him
round look aloft here at the sea; there's time for that.  An old, old sight,
said?  he should still go before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again?  But
sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye.  He's too far off to lower yet,
she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod's quarter, so that
sink to.  Aye,
special, a most cunning, oh, a most malicious difference!  And yet, I say
straight on, in strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from
the better if the bitterer quarter.  But good bye, good bye, old mast-head!
the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake.  Against the
the palms.  Leeward!  the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then;
the wind.  These warm Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow
their mark, however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack, and
there!  What d'ye see?  Nothing, sir.  Nothing!  and noon at hand!  The
three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it.  Forehead to
to go at last.  And by the eternal Poles!  these same Trades that so directly
unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along!  To it!  Aloft
upon the whale, the while I'm gone.  We'll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night,
when the white whale lies down there, tied by head and tail.  He gave the
where?  Will I have eyes at the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those
wind he now steers for the open jaw, murmured Starbuck to himself, as he
word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered through the cloven



     The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead,
     the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his sable raiment frayed to
     to the last letter of thy word.  Where is the second hearse?  Away, mates, to
.. <p 561 >
.. <p 562 >
Ahab, cried Starbuck, not too late is it, even now, the third day, to
Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven.
Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads;
The harpoon dropped from his hand.  Befooled, befooled! --drawing in a long
again steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed the ship, --which thus
and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight path in the sea.  Oh!
and this, this then is the hearse that thou didst promise.  But I hold thee
are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me. --Where's the
been so long a one as before.  And still as Ahab glided over the waves the
beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted together; as head on, he came
chase, and the resistance to his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or
churning his tail among the boats; and once more flailed them apart;
desist.  See!  Moby Dick seeks thee not.  It is thou, thou, that madly
far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him, though for the present
far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart.  But he rallied.  And
flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had just
gained that perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and
he leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and follow
her headway had been stopped.  He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity,
him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval.  Glancing upwards, he saw
hoisted to the side, and were busily at work in repairing them.  One after
hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping back into
impelled to leeward, by both oars and canvas.  And at last when Ahab was
lances.  As he saw all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats;
last encounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now
lean breath -- Aye, Parsee!  I see thee again. --Aye, and thou goest before;
like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower of flakes, leaving
nails, and so nail it to the mast.  Whether fagged by the three days' running
now marking that the vane or
obliquely from the sea.  Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist, it
of Stubb and Flask, busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and
one side of the upper part of their bows, but leaving Ahab's almost without a
return to me; if not, Ahab is enough to die --Down, men!  the first thing
round to the fish's back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which, during
scar.  While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as
seekest him!  Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly
shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up.  Lashed round and
shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old Ahab.
sliding by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck's face as
so rapidly nearing him once more; though indeed the whale's last start had not
spilling out the irons and lances from the two mates' boats, and dashing in
that but offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I harpoon.  Ye
the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble trunk of the
the deep.  Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed for an instant
the other, through the portholes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses
the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him,
the ship!  those boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and
the whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he
to the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corroded in him,
true, the White Whale's way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat
unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to the boat;
upon escaping with the corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the
whale.  Give way!  cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward
whale?  gone down again?  But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent
whether it was some latent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was
while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been





     Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now help
     Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last
     swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and spite of all
     the pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking lookouts on the sea.
.. <p 565 >
.. <p 566 >
And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is all too soft; would it
And now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself, and all its crew,
Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its keel;
I grapple with thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for hate's sake I
Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here.  I grin at thee, thou grinning whale!
Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb's own unwinking eye?
and each floating oar, and every lance-pole, and spinning, animate and
and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was shot out of
as in the gaseous Fata Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water;
band of overspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed.  Retribution,
billows of my whole foregone life, and top this one piled comber of my death!
but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far off the
chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale!  Thus, I give up the
clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the neck,
come to her, for the voyage is up.  From the ship's bows, nearly all the
death on lonely life!  Oh, now I feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost
die!  Cherries?  I only wish that we were where they grow.  Oh, Stubb, I
from side to side strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad
grief.  Ho, ho!  from all your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold
hammer.  Oh!  ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel; and
hand the cup!  Oh, oh!  oh, oh!  thou grinning whale, but there'll be plenty
hearse!  cried ahab from the boat; its wood could only be American!
hope my poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will now
igniting velocity the line ran through the groove; --ran foul.  Ahab stooped to
in the rope's final end flew out of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an
it; let Stubb die in his drawers!  A most mouldy and over salted death,
mechanically retained in their hands, just as they had darted from their
oarsman, and smiting the sea, disappeared in its depths.  For an instant,
of gulping soon!  Why fly ye not, O Ahab!  For me, off shoes and jacket to
off from the last fond pride of meanest shipwrecked captains?  Oh, lonely
only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and Pole-pointed
other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab's boat, where, for a time, he lay
pool!  and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still
pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.  The ship!  The hearse! --the second
prow, --death-glorious ship!  must ye then perish, and without me?  Am I cut
quiescent.  I turn my body from the sun.  What ho, Tashtego!  Let me hear thy
seamen now hung inactive; hammers, bits of plank, lances, and harpoons,
shook on their bull-like necks.  Through the breach, they heard the waters
sidelong fading phantom,
smote the ship's starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled.  Some fell flat
spear!  The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with
spit my last breath at thee.  Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common
sun, moon, and stars!  I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted
that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his forehead
the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone.  Next instant, the heavy eye-splice
the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned.  The ship?  Great God,
though; --cherries!  cherries!  cherries!  Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we
up his ghost.  For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but
upon their faces.  Like dislodged trucks, the heads of the harpooneers aloft
various employments; all their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which
were stuffed with brushwood!  I grin at thee, thou grinning whale!  Look ye,
where is the ship?  Soon they through dim, bewildering mediums saw her
while fixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches,
MOBY.100;1               30
MOBY.101;1               20
MOBY.102;1               19
MOBY.103;1               11
MOBY.104;1               17
MOBY.105;1               19
MOBY.106;1               11
MOBY.107;1               13
MOBY.108;1               18
MOBY.109;1               11
MOBY.10;1                18
MOBY.110;1               25
MOBY.111;1                6
MOBY.112;1               12
MOBY.113;1               14
MOBY.114;1                8
MOBY.115;1               11
MOBY.116;1                6
MOBY.117;1                6
MOBY.118;1               11
MOBY.119;1               28
MOBY.11;1                 8
MOBY.120;1                3
MOBY.121;1                7
MOBY.122;1                1
MOBY.123;1               14
MOBY.124;1               14
MOBY.125;1               13
MOBY.126;1               15
MOBY.127;1                8
MOBY.128;1               16
MOBY.129;1                7
MOBY.12;1                10
MOBY.130;1               20
MOBY.131;1                5
MOBY.132;1               18
MOBY.133;1               41
MOBY.134;1               91
MOBY.13;1                20
MOBY.14;1                 9
MOBY.15;1                14
MOBY.16;1                61
MOBY.17;1                26
MOBY.18;1                16
MOBY.19;1                13
MOBY.20;1                11
MOBY.21;1                13
MOBY.22;1                19
MOBY.23;1                 5
MOBY.24;1                20
MOBY.25;1                 4
MOBY.26;1                14
MOBY.27;1                19
MOBY.28;1                16
MOBY.29;1                14
MOBY.30;1                 4
MOBY.31;1                 9
MOBY.32;1                60
MOBY.33;1                12
MOBY.34;1                26
MOBY.35;1                30
MOBY.36;1                32
MOBY.37;1                 6
MOBY.38;1                 5
